[Amit Varma]: Where were you when India won the 1983 World Cup? I was 9 years old then, assembled with
[Amit Varma]: my family at the home of my uncle, Babul Mama, in Hauskas in New Delhi. I didn't follow
[Amit Varma]: cricket in those days, but I also got caught up in the drama, how could you not, when all
[Amit Varma]: the adults around you were going mad. And the madness reached its peak when Michael
[Amit Varma]: Holding was out to Mohinder Amanath and celebrations erupted in the living room. I was even then
[Amit Varma]: the voice of reason and I tried to calm everyone down, saying that hey, the match isn't over,
[Amit Varma]: there's still one West Indies batsman left. As I said, I didn't follow cricket then. Of
[Amit Varma]: course, that changed as I grew up and cricket became a big part of my life and indeed that
[Amit Varma]: of so many of my fellow Indians. We can remember where we were when big sporting moments happened,
[Amit Varma]: when Miyandad hit that six of my fellow Chandigarhian Chetan Sharma, when Ravi Shastri won that
[Amit Varma]: Audi, when Jadeja, Ajay Jadeja, not Ravindra, blasted Waqar Yunus in the 1996 World Cup,
[Amit Varma]: when Lakshman and Ravid did that thing they did, when Kumle bowled with a broken jaw,
[Amit Varma]: when Dhoni gave the ball to Joginder Sharma, when Virat Kohli lifted Sachin Tendulkar on
[Amit Varma]: his shoulders at the Wankhede Stadium in 2011. And it's not just cricket, we remember moments
[Amit Varma]: in other sports as well and the other heroes we celebrated, from Abhinav Bindra to Leander
[Amit Varma]: Pace to Sena Nehwal to my favourite Vishy Anand. Sport was part of the emotional journey
[Amit Varma]: we made getting here. And it also reflected the journey our nation made, with all its
[Amit Varma]: flaws and aspirations and assertions. It's a hell of a story. And when it's told by a
[Amit Varma]: hell of a writer, it can reach a place within us that nothing else can.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen. My guest today is Sharda Ogre, who should need no introduction,
[Amit Varma]: but hey, I might as well do it anyway. Over three decades, Sharda has written about practically
[Amit Varma]: every sport in the country and built a body of work that is inspiring, moving and enlightening.
[Amit Varma]: She started at midday, went on to the Hindu in India today, and then spent a few years
[Amit Varma]: at ESPN Crickinfo, though after my time, so I can't quite call her a colleague. I've loved
[Amit Varma]: her writing ever since I first read her, and I was delighted to get her on the show for
[Amit Varma]: a conversation about sports journalism and the state of Indian sport. Sharda combines
[Amit Varma]: two qualities that are hard to find in most writers. She's both clear eyed and empathetic.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the way she can find the human stories in sport, while also shedding light
[Amit Varma]: on the bigger picture, the larger context. I won't say more about her because I try to
[Amit Varma]: avoid hyperbole, but I'll simply say that she is my favourite sports writer in the whole
[Amit Varma]: world. Now, despite being a cricket journalist myself for a few years, I don't actually remember
[Amit Varma]: hanging out with her at any point or even having a conversation. So this was much awaited,
[Amit Varma]: and it will remain much awaited for you for another 90 seconds or so. Because before we
[Amit Varma]: get to the conversation, we will take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Among the many articles Sharda Ogre has written in her career, many deal with the extreme
[Amit Varma]: measures sports people take to up their performance. But learning how to optimise performance isn't
[Amit Varma]: something that only athletes can benefit from. All of us can be the Virat Kohli of our own
[Amit Varma]: lives. Allow me to recommend an online course that will help you find the best version of
[Amit Varma]: yourself. Head on over to the sponsors of this episode, The Great Courses Plus at thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: and check out a course called The Psychology of Performance, taught by Eddie O'Connor.
[Amit Varma]: In 24 online lectures, Dr. O'Connor will take you through sport and performance psychology,
[Amit Varma]: the fundas behind deliberate practice, the importance of mindfulness and internal motivation,
[Amit Varma]: and show you how to tolerate pain and get through the hard times. And that's just one
[Amit Varma]: of the many great courses on this aptly named site. The Great Courses Plus has a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: library of online courses from subjects ranging from music, math, cooking, history, political
[Amit Varma]: theory and much else. They also have an app where you can listen to the audio of these
[Amit Varma]: courses the same way you listen to podcasts and it will cost you nothing. You get one
[Amit Varma]: month of unlimited free access if you use the following URL, thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen. That's right unseen, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen for one month of unlimited free
[Amit Varma]: access. Jump to it.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, Sharda, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for having me, Amit. Hello. Hello. It's great to be here. Thank you very
[Amit Varma]: much.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, we've kind of known each other for the longest time or rather I've known
[Amit Varma]: you for the longest time as this remarkable kind of sports journalist, whose work I've
[Amit Varma]: loved so much. And you know, one of the things that really sets you apart in my eyes is that
[Amit Varma]: you don't just follow cricket, which is the glamour sport in India, you pretty much write
[Amit Varma]: about everything and care about everything. And there's some great work there. And, and
[Amit Varma]: the other, you know, aspect of what I like about your work is that they're all human
[Amit Varma]: stories. So it's not just about, you know, sport as in what is happening in a cricket
[Amit Varma]: field, but you go much deeper, but we'll leave all of that for later. And I don't also want
[Amit Varma]: to embarrass you with too much praise. Let's start talking a little bit about your early
[Amit Varma]: life. Like how did you like I know that you know, you grew up in Bhandup and you were
[Amit Varma]: an aspiring, I think a middle order, hard hitting batter, as it were.
[Guest]: And a useless, a superb fielder, but an absolutely useless, unaccomplished, untrained, uncoached
[Guest]: lower order batsman that you can batter, but that you can just chuck out at any point in
[Guest]: time. But you know, like the boys needed people, their team to be built. So that's what I was
[Guest]: there for. Thanks. Thanks so much for all the great things that you have said. But yeah,
[Guest]: that was my life. You know, I grew up living in Bhandup, which was when I went to St. Xavier's
[Guest]: College, all my friends who lived in other parts used to say, do you need a visa to go
[Guest]: to Bhandup? And it was that kind of sort of Bombay snobbery that exists with all us suburbanites.
[Guest]: So I grew up in a very non Bombay surroundings, because it had space, it had, you know, what
[Guest]: what are now the gated communities of the modern age, it's like we grew up in the 70s
[Guest]: with that. We had, it was just all the employees of Geskin Williams, where my father worked.
[Guest]: And all of us lived in the same place, we had a swimming pool, we had a cricket ground
[Guest]: sized sort of ground. I mean, in my childhood memory, that's what I remember. A pitch that
[Guest]: looked the size, it was a football pitch almost, you know, so you had, I mean, of course, again,
[Guest]: they must be much smaller, but I remember seeing it. And it was just, I think it's about
[Guest]: a kilometer's chakkar to go around the whole compound or the property or whatever it's
[Guest]: called, the colony, we used to call it. You can't use the word colony now without all
[Guest]: kinds of other allusions to it. But that's how I grew up. So I grew up with space and
[Guest]: with companions and in a safe sort of an environment where you could play sport. You know, older
[Guest]: boys would be borrowing books, I would be buying magazines, buying books, I'd borrow
[Guest]: it from them, we'd talk. So it was a very sheltered childhood, definitely, in a way
[Guest]: that gave me access to sport. At the same time, I wasn't formally coached. So I went
[Guest]: to a normal kind of a school. I went to the Holy Cross Convent High School, K. Vilathane,
[Guest]: which was a state SSC school it was. So it was again, a lot of space there to play. All
[Guest]: the teachers wanted me to play basketball because I was tall, discus because I'm sort
[Guest]: of a discus thrower type. I didn't like it too much. I sort of, okay, or whatever, you
[Guest]: know, I wasn't good at it. I didn't take to the discipline of it, maybe. I just like playing
[Guest]: badminton and there was a court there at home in the compound where we stayed, colony where
[Guest]: we stayed. There's a badminton court there. So you play badminton. And I like being cricket
[Guest]: because I love cricket. And I played football every time there was a World Cup. So I grew
[Guest]: up surrounded by having access to sport and playing sport, girls and boys together. It
[Guest]: was not a big deal at all. You know, and this is the 1970s, mid 1970s, because there are
[Guest]: no other children. Those are the children that are there. That's whom you play with.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, building friends like you have in Bombay. So there were like my
[Guest]: various buildings and various friends. So I grew up in all that kind of an atmosphere.
[Guest]: And my father was an athlete in his college days, like a proper serious athlete. He played
[Guest]: a lot of sport. And so it was very much part of our reading, watching, talking, you know,
[Guest]: that kind of a thing. I have a younger brother who's four and a half years younger than me,
[Guest]: and he has zero interest in sport. Zero meaning zero. He's a banker. He works for the Exim
[Guest]: Bank, but he's a very smart sort of a very different person to me. And he's my political
[Guest]: advisor. If I have any doubt about any political issue or question, I ask him, and he has a
[Guest]: very clear mind and he just sorts it out in his head immediately. And his politics are
[Guest]: not banker politics, if you know what I'm saying.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know exactly what you're saying. So you know, one of the things when you're
[Amit Varma]: like, when I look back on my childhood, and I was an 80s kid, though, I think for, you
[Amit Varma]: know, from this vantage point, where we are today, 80s kid, 70s kid, same thing, no internet.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that kind of strikes me was how unformed I was, in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: if you think about like, how do we form our image of ourselves? Like, who am I? What do
[Amit Varma]: I want to be? All of those things. And what kind of strikes me when I look back on the
[Amit Varma]: young me is that I was completely unformed and could have been no other way, because
[Amit Varma]: you didn't have the whole world available to you through the internet and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Your influences were limited, they were arbitrary, they'd be a cliched bunch of books we'd read
[Amit Varma]: as kids, it'd be the same standard music we'd kind of listen to when we went to college.
[Amit Varma]: And so it almost seems that people of my generation, we have almost been formed twice, like first,
[Amit Varma]: of course, you're formed in the normal way. You're a kid, you're a teenager, you grow
[Amit Varma]: up, you come into the world. And then you're sort of formed again later on when the whole
[Amit Varma]: world is kind of opened out to you. So, you know, what was your self image of yourself
[Amit Varma]: back in those days like, and this is also interesting, you know, in the context of sport,
[Amit Varma]: for example, that today, if you love sport, there's so many 24 seven sport channels, right,
[Amit Varma]: you can follow any sport you want, you can see everything, everything is intimate, and
[Amit Varma]: it's close up and face up. And at the same time, it's larger than life and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But back in the day, there were people who loved cricket intensely without having seen
[Amit Varma]: a single day of, you know, a test match or whatever, they're using their imagination
[Amit Varma]: to form all those pictures in their heads. You know, Ram Guha spoke movingly of this
[Amit Varma]: when he was on my show recently, that, you know, how much it meant to actually be at
[Amit Varma]: a ground and watch a test match. And today, we kind of take all of it for granted. Describe
[Amit Varma]: your world to me a little bit. I mean, I know it must seem very banal to you, because for
[Amit Varma]: you, it's like your everyday memories and all of that. But I'm kind of interested that
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you're growing up as a kid, what is your world? What is your self image?
[Amit Varma]: What is the sport you're taking in? What does a young Sharda want?
[Guest]: It's interesting what you say, and sort of our normal reaction is to not talk about ourself,
[Guest]: you know, is that, listen, I'm not that important. It doesn't matter. You know, it's the other
[Guest]: because it's a journalist standard response. Bhai, I am not the story, you know, so...
[Amit Varma]: Today, you're the story.
[Guest]: I'm sweating. So, what you're saying is interesting, if I look back again, what I had at home,
[Guest]: like I said, there was an environment and a conversation around sport, and we played
[Guest]: or did something, we all learned to swim, we all learned to cycle, because it was all
[Guest]: there. And now I laugh at people when they talk about gated communities, because I said,
[Guest]: you have no idea what a real gated community is like, because we grew up in that. And it
[Guest]: was our little sort of cocoon, we had people from all parts of the country that were staying
[Guest]: there, different backgrounds, you know, the real, almost India in a capsule in that little
[Guest]: space of various, so the biggest officers lived in the biggest bungalows. And, you know,
[Guest]: you had that sense of, and I remember one thing, at that time, also, so sort of eastern
[Guest]: northeast of Bombay, not northeast, near Thane, around that side, even in Thane district as
[Guest]: at that time, the big thing used to be in which colony was the film shooting? Who had
[Guest]: shot a film? And our colony was so boring, nobody shot anything in it. And I was just
[Guest]: so it was, I remember just feeling a sense of, you know, being missing out from this
[Guest]: big glamour thing of having a movie shot in your where you lived. And now when I look
[Guest]: back at it, I'm thinking, you know, it's how absurd is that, even that, even wanting something
[Guest]: like that, you know, how ridiculous it is. So I grew up with, what I always was, which
[Guest]: is what I get most probably from my mother, is that there were two bunches of kids, right?
[Guest]: So the boys were slightly older, they would have been say, in senior school, and we all
[Guest]: were like in junior school almost. And there were no girls of that age who were playing
[Guest]: sport, it was just me and a couple of my other sort of female friends, we were the new female
[Guest]: entrance into the thing. What I always was, that I could stand up and fight with the boys.
[Guest]: If they're taking anyone else's trip, I would stand up and fight and say, you fight with
[Guest]: me, don't come and fight with these other, like the littler children than I am. So my
[Guest]: advantage of being taller and bigger than most other kids in the, this thing also helped.
[Guest]: And I have, I hear stories that I was a bit of a wild kind of this thing, I was sort of,
[Guest]: I had a sense of adventure, I tried to climb out of a second floor balcony once because
[Guest]: someone had climbed out of a ground floor balcony, it is the most normal thing to do
[Guest]: climbing out of a balcony. So that's the thing, stories I was told about myself. And that
[Guest]: I compared to my brother, I was a really hyperactive and a very troublesome sort of, I mean, no,
[Guest]: not troublesome, as in like sort of destructive kind of thing. I used to, I used to like,
[Guest]: I remember I went to some, so I had all these stories of myself that I was kind of going
[Guest]: off in my own tangent. So I remember this is a completely different conversation from
[Guest]: growing up. I remember I was travelling, when I did the story about football in the Northeast,
[Guest]: I was in a taxi, me, my colleagues, couple of colleagues, Nikhil, Madhu, the photographer,
[Guest]: and the guy who was travelling with us was a Nag, in Dimapur, Nagaland. He turned around
[Guest]: and he asked us, what are you? So what he meant to say is, what is your tribe? You know,
[Guest]: which is a normal conversation, what are you? So I said, I'm difficult. So, so that was
[Guest]: my, that was my response. I'm difficult. So my sense of self to sport, there was another
[Guest]: thing that used to happen every year, the factory, the, so Geskin Williams had various
[Guest]: divisions, they had shankies, screws and fasteners, whatever, whatever. They had a sports, annual
[Guest]: sports meet. And we would all go to watch it. And it would have athletics and it would
[Guest]: have, at the end of it, all the managers would come and do tug of war and aunties would do
[Guest]: leg and spoon race and maybe children also went, I don't remember competing. But you
[Guest]: had this sports event that was very much part of the whole life of that, of that colony.
[Guest]: Because what else will you do in Bandop in 1970s? You know, there was one cinema hall.
[Guest]: So you made your own entertainment. And my reference points for sport would come not
[Guest]: from television. I seem to have a memory, only in the 80s, I remember seeing Borg and
[Guest]: McEnroe playing together, you know, playing that final at Wimbledon. So 79, I remember
[Guest]: watching India versus Pakistan. India had gone to Pakistan, Kapil Dev's debut series.
[Guest]: So that I remember seeing very much on television. Massive amounts of Illustrated Weekly, Sports
[Guest]: Week at the beginning, Illustrated Weekly, Sports Week. Consume it like in a crazy way.
[Guest]: And they would have these cricket specials and you would read it and you'd read Raju
[Guest]: Bhartan. So when you met Raju Bhartan, it was, oh my God, Raju Bhartan. You know, this
[Guest]: is the guy whose bylines we've read. And so I remember reading a lot of that, consuming
[Guest]: a lot of that. I remember listening to commentary on the radio, cricket with Vijay Merchant
[Guest]: at 2pm. And Vijay Merchant in his strict strident sort of, I am telling you to behave yourself,
[Guest]: everybody voice. Ticking off Gavaskar was like the big thing that he did at one point,
[Guest]: you know. God knows what he ticked him off, I've forgotten. And Gavaskar was like a God
[Guest]: for us. Of course, the central focus of our cricketing life at that point was Sunil Gavaskar.
[Guest]: And who he was, what he represented. So you had all these memories and sort of flickering
[Guest]: images and you built, again, it's like you built your own universe of sport around it,
[Guest]: you know, of these nobility on your side and the other guys or whoever they were, we don't
[Guest]: know, you know. And they had this contest and this is what it was and this was the game
[Guest]: and this is what it meant to play, to be a good player on the back foot. You saw Gundappa
[Guest]: Vishwanath playing. So you had all these little patchwork of memories and images that came
[Guest]: and sort of filled themselves in that point. From the very beginning, I was obsessive reader,
[Guest]: voracious to the crazy degree. I would read anything. So that was also a thing. So the
[Guest]: same, this Colonia, which is now looking like some empire by itself. In 1979, it was the
[Guest]: International Year of the Child. So I would have been UNICEF International Year of the
[Guest]: Child. And they came out with a, they had a contest in this Geskin Williams in Calcutta
[Guest]: and Bombay and wherever else they had factories. And they sent out, you could send stories,
[Guest]: pictures, images. I don't think it was a contest as much. It was just like a collection of
[Guest]: the children of the employees and what they put out. And they came out with a little magazine
[Guest]: and we all got prizes. So I remember I sent out a short story. Pritish Nandy was the editor
[Guest]: of that magazine. Yeah. So, you know, and because it was headquartered in Calcutta.
[Guest]: So there was this whole thing of being a writing person and being a reading person. And so
[Guest]: that was always there in my life growing up. Because I was so obsessed with books, I loved
[Guest]: going to bookshops. And when I was in about in my 10th standard, I remember my class,
[Guest]: every class has to give a gift to like a departing gift to the school. And our gift was we gave,
[Guest]: there was coming up with a new building. So we gave them books for their library. So it
[Guest]: was 1500 bucks that were collected. This is 1500 bucks in 1984, which is a lot of money.
[Guest]: And we went and bought books. That was like the happiest day of my life, like going to
[Guest]: a shop and say, I'll take that. I'll take that. I'll take that, you know, so it was
[Guest]: like that. So it was always I was always connected to words and to books. And I was always seen
[Guest]: in the family as the girl who was sort of, like I said, difficult, or who was always
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't do sort of girly, girly things. I wasn't one for girly things at that time.
[Guest]: What were girly things to do? You know, and but I had fantastic, I had older cousins who
[Guest]: were terrific, very tolerant, they would take you anywhere, look after you, feed you, you
[Guest]: know, feed and water children, they were very good with it. So it was a happy and a comfortable
[Guest]: life in that sense of a sense of self. And like you're seeing unformed in a way that
[Guest]: you have no idea of divisions and of, you know, stratifications that exist, that you
[Guest]: are some person who is growing up in Bhandup, what the hell do you know that you want to
[Guest]: go to St. Xavier's College? You know, who do you think you are type, you know, you should
[Guest]: just go to some college in Sion or whatever. So you had no idea of that. You had no idea
[Guest]: of that at all. I remember listening to the entire 1981 Ashes commentary entirely the
[Guest]: whole thing. And I remember with the sinking feeling that Kim Hughes was just like going
[Guest]: to get smashed in that, my favorite at the time, smashed meaning smashed. And yeah, so
[Guest]: you have all these memories, you have all these things. And it's, it's like be sort
[Guest]: of written into your life when you look back at it, that it gave you a sort of sense of
[Guest]: security and a sense of self that, I mean, it sounds quite arrogant to say that it remains
[Guest]: unshakable. But yeah, you're quite secure in when you were growing up. I mean, you had
[Guest]: privilege, which is a big thing, which you understand and recognize it now. But, but
[Guest]: you're quite secure. You didn't want to be something else. I remember I used to go and
[Guest]: meet our cousins in Pedder Road and they were very snobbish towards us. And we were wondering
[Guest]: why. We are the ones that have the swimming pool. We are the ones that have the badminton
[Guest]: court. So that was the thing that was there. I never understood Bombay's sort of snobbery
[Amit Varma]: until much later. Yeah. In fact, you know, what's interesting is that in talking about
[Amit Varma]: how disparagingly South Bombay people looked at Bhanduk people, you managed to randomly
[Guest]: insult Sayan. Yeah. I know, I know. So bad. Because I actually got into, I can't remember,
[Guest]: I got into a, see where we were at Geskir Williams Bhanduk, there were not even schools
[Guest]: that were close by that you could get admitted to. So I got into Little Angels in Sayan and
[Guest]: I got, this was that, by the way, I went to for my first three years in school, first
[Guest]: and second standard, but in the colony school, there was no other school that we could go.
[Guest]: There was one teacher, there was one classroom, all kids of all classes used to be there till
[Guest]: whatever age, when the parents decided this is a bit unserious, you can't have children
[Guest]: studying like this. And at one point we had a lovely teacher, Mrs. Bernadette. We used
[Guest]: to basically, anyone needed a haircut, she would cut the child's hair on the table. You
[Guest]: know, their birthdays are coming up, you know, she would make the dresses, she would stitch
[Guest]: the dresses and bring it. She was like a one-person university of all types, you know, education,
[Guest]: home science, whatever else you wanted, Bernadette teacher knew how to do it. So we grew up in
[Guest]: this completely informal sort of system. You're sitting with kids who are two years older
[Guest]: to you and studying high-level maths. So when you have to go to school, people kept looking
[Guest]: at, apparently they told my parents, what is she doing to learn for the first two years?
[Guest]: So they said, this GKW colony, west side, it's a school, which is not even a school.
[Guest]: It's like a building and some children and some teachers came there. So I didn't mean
[Guest]: to insult Sayan, because I'm feeling very bad that I've insulted Sayan. Yeah, so I got
[Guest]: into Little Angels and then Holy Cross. And the only reason I went to Holy Cross in Thane
[Guest]: because it was closer and the company bus could drop us. And I even got into SIES college
[Guest]: before I got into St. Xavier's college. You see, there you are. Excellent. Long story.
[Guest]: You walk into that St. Xavier's quad, yaar, how can you not say I want to study here?
[Amit Varma]: You walk into the quad and you say, boss, this, this, yaar, yaar. So, you know, lots
[Amit Varma]: of strands to pursue here and I'm going to come back to the personal, but first I'll
[Amit Varma]: take a digression because my show is full of digressions. Perfect. Which begins actually
[Amit Varma]: with a personal question, which is when you started playing sport, how competitive were
[Amit Varma]: you? And my larger sort of digressive question is about competitiveness per se, because you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about how one of the traits that is common to elite sports people everywhere is
[Amit Varma]: their intense competitiveness. Like Leander Pays once said that he doesn't like losing
[Amit Varma]: in Karim to his sisters. And you've described about how, you know, Yuvraj Singh with whom
[Amit Varma]: you co-wrote that book After Cancer, about how when he was recovering, he would play
[Amit Varma]: TT with a friend, he'd play one point, win the point, go and lie down, come back again,
[Amit Varma]: refuse to stop playing. Yeah. So my broader question about competitiveness is this, that
[Amit Varma]: yeah, one, sure, sure. I'm guessing that it's got to be a necessary, but not sufficient
[Amit Varma]: condition to make it to the highest level. But is it then that like, this also seems
[Amit Varma]: to me a trait that can be incredibly toxic also in the modern world, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: if you are comparative about everything, if you look at the world in a zero sum way, which
[Amit Varma]: is what sport is, this is zero something, you win if the other guy loses, the extent
[Amit Varma]: of your victory depends on the humiliation of the other guy, so to say, in a manner of
[Amit Varma]: speaking, whereas the real world isn't like that. So in that sense, it seems almost a
[Amit Varma]: two sided trait that in something like, you know, sport, you need it, you cannot do without
[Amit Varma]: it. And in many ways, it's healthy, because it can drive you to excel, just wanting to
[Amit Varma]: be better than everybody else means that you know, you're better tomorrow than you were
[Amit Varma]: yesterday, which is a great thing in and of itself. But equally, it seems to me that especially
[Amit Varma]: in a country like India, we've been poor for so long, there's, you know, so much kind of
[Amit Varma]: scarcity, the mindset can also become problematic. And then it strikes me that if let's say there
[Amit Varma]: is someone who is trying to make it at a certain level of sport, and they're incredibly competitive,
[Amit Varma]: but they don't make it there. Or even if they do make it there, that trade actually can
[Amit Varma]: hurt them more than it can help them. What are your sort of thoughts on this having kind
[Amit Varma]: of seen all this from close in a sense, seen at least one side of it from very close?
[Guest]: I think competitiveness, what you're saying is very, very central to elite athletes. And
[Guest]: because I can see it in them, I know it's absolute absence in me, I like do not possess,
[Guest]: I'm not competitive at all. I really struggle with that kind of, you know, I will be better
[Guest]: than you and this or that. So just file on time, be better than what you were yesterday
[Guest]: kind of a thing that is there. So I recognize it in athletes, and I admire it also because
[Guest]: it becomes it shows up in unexpected places with unexpected kind of people. And in India,
[Guest]: particularly in Indian sport, what happens is that we forget that our sport is I mean,
[Guest]: I remember you were talking to I think it was Joy Bhattacharya about saying that we
[Guest]: don't have a sporting culture, etc, etc. I will discuss this later with you in another
[Guest]: of this thing. But our sport is fundamentally hooked around livelihood rather than leisure
[Guest]: in India. And we have to understand everything and everyone from that point of view. I'm
[Guest]: not talking about absolutely the top elite cricket, but at some point it'll come it comes
[Guest]: from that, you know, why are so many 1000s of kids wanting to play cricket because their
[Guest]: family sees a life and a livelihood in it better than whatever state that they're in
[Guest]: at that point. Competitiveness can be toxic. I think this whole competitiveness then translates
[Guest]: into at another level, like a non athletic level translates into the competitiveness
[Guest]: for the IITs, competitiveness for you know, I mean, I know of kids who have passed your
[Guest]: management, your MBA basic entrance exam, and they won't take up, they've got admission
[Guest]: into a school, X school, they won't take it up, because it's not one of the top three
[Guest]: IMs. Or if you've gotten to an IM, but it's not A, B, or C, you don't want it, you know.
[Guest]: So that kind of competitiveness is sort of, it comes from another place. I mean, whether
[Guest]: it's a place of maybe societal, almost a framework that is seen as perfect and the fit and the
[Guest]: thing that you should be, whereas all the time you want to tell these kids, listen,
[Guest]: you are not what you are today and what you've achieved today, you are going to be what you
[Guest]: are 20 years later. So just chill, take a step back and breathe a little bit. With an
[Guest]: athlete, you can't give them time to do that. And I think that in the sense, this is seen
[Guest]: actually also because it's a question of like livelihood, I said, it's also seen this lack
[Guest]: of, you know, this lack of killer instinct, kind of that cliche that we get hammered out,
[Guest]: oh, Indians don't have like a killer instinct. That kind of thing is so, it's so terrible
[Guest]: and so toxic, because it's almost like you're insulting the person that's competing to say
[Guest]: that you're not competing to my standard of what I think you should compete, you know.
[Guest]: And I think our whole framework of sport is now organized around, it's a top down kind
[Guest]: of a thing. Everything depends on medals rather than on mass participation. And from that
[Guest]: comes this competitiveness of, okay, I want to be the best person in this field. So I
[Guest]: think that the really good people that have it, as in athletically, the people that have
[Guest]: it, they just somehow managed to break through. And the people that don't make it, it's not
[Guest]: that they don't have it, it's that the circumstances just pile on top of them so much that they're
[Guest]: fighting against so many things. I mean, to succeed in Indian sport, you have to have
[Guest]: almost, you've got to have like a, your skin like a tank, you know, you have to be to withstand
[Guest]: everything else that's there around you. And the atmosphere around sport, around Olympic
[Guest]: sport, and it's improved marginally, like hugely, hugely in the last say 10 years than
[Guest]: what it was. I was just chatting to a couple of my friends the other day, Manuja and Prajwal
[Guest]: Hegde and Manuja Veerappa from Times of India. And we were talking about Dhanraj Pillay.
[Guest]: And we said, my God, what a player he could have been in this, in this day and age of
[Guest]: social media. And one of the things that I think Prajwal said, they would not have allowed
[Guest]: him to be himself at this point, because he was just like a wild guy. He was just, he
[Guest]: was like the superstar of his sport, and he was a wild guy. And at that time, in the 80s
[Guest]: and the 90s, what did they do to wild people, they kind of just beat them down. And a lot
[Guest]: of the way in my mind, sport, our sport is organized is that the administrators really
[Guest]: don't want people to succeed to an absolutely higher level, because they don't want them
[Guest]: to become bigger than themselves. You know, so that's what our athletes, our competitive
[Guest]: elite athletes are fighting all the time. You see it, you can say, I used to think this
[Guest]: was a rubbish notion, you know, because I was 20 years old and stupid and whatever,
[Guest]: and kind of a bit naive. But now I look back and I say, yeah, you know, what would India
[Guest]: do if it had five players in the top 50 in tennis? Nobody would be listening to the administrators
[Guest]: that way. But anyway, this is a favorite topic, I could go on for five hours. So I'm just
[Guest]: saying that competitiveness in Indian sport, it's, you need it, of course, because the
[Guest]: odds are stacked so heavily against you, and the numbers are so huge that for you to break
[Guest]: through, you have to be completely committed and driven. What happens to you on the other
[Guest]: side is you would hope that people have sort of a safety net they can fall back onto. Because
[Guest]: I've done this, and I can't do more. And I got screwed by the whoever it was, system
[Guest]: person, whoever, and therefore I've got the safety net that I can fall back on. But a
[Guest]: lot of people, we're seeing particularly in, you know, the very tragic story of the young
[Guest]: female wrestler, who committed suicide about a couple of weeks ago, from the Fogart family.
[Guest]: You know, she's a young cousin of Geeta and Babita, because she lost in a bout, she lost
[Guest]: a bout in a tournament that she took part in. So this is the other side of it. There
[Guest]: is this pressure and this expectation of that, you know, you are now the ATM of the family,
[Guest]: go out and do it, you know. So there's all this that's going on in the last sort of say
[Guest]: 10 years or so. I know, I don't know if I'm even responding to what you had asked or discussed,
[Guest]: but these are my sort of general thoughts about it. As to my, what level did I play
[Guest]: competitive sport? GKW Westside estate level is what I was, basically. I was just really
[Guest]: bad, athletically terrible.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, we'll just have to take your word for it. There's no way of knowing. You did
[Guest]: say you were a terrific fielder. So it's not as if you are in tact. Terrific fielder, sorry.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not as if it's entirely modesty there. No, I mean, just kind of taking off from there
[Amit Varma]: that the thing is, what you see in sport is, of course, a survivor bias. That is what the
[Amit Varma]: fan sees. The fan sees a survivor bias. You see the people who made it at the top and
[Amit Varma]: they're happy and the competitiveness works for them. But I'm guessing that if you're
[Amit Varma]: incredibly competitive, you're always focused on beating the other guy, and you don't make
[Amit Varma]: it right and you're a failure. And for whatever reason, it may not even be your inherent skill.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe you just hit a wall at a certain level and you're not better than that, or circumstances
[Amit Varma]: conspire against you or you get one injury and you're done and that's it, it's your bad
[Amit Varma]: luck. Then I would imagine that that competitiveness, that focus on doing better than the other
[Amit Varma]: person can also make you incredibly bitter and can hurt a competitive person more than
[Amit Varma]: it would hurt, say, someone not as competitive, because you know, you wanted to beat the other
[Amit Varma]: guy so bad, and now you're nowhere, it's all over. You know, and you've obviously, you
[Amit Varma]: know, covered sports at all levels. You haven't just covered elite cricket, you've covered
[Amit Varma]: every sport at every level, essentially. Is this something that strikes you as poignant?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even with a much shorter span of time covering cricket, I used to come across like
[Amit Varma]: I remember calling one of the legends of Indian cricket of the 60s and 70s for a quote at
[Amit Varma]: one point. And I was in wisdom at that time. And this was probably around 2001. And he
[Amit Varma]: assumed because I'm calling from wisdom and multinational and all that he said he asked
[Amit Varma]: me what about vitamin M? You know, and it was so sad. I just felt like crying. It was
[Guest]: it's just horrible.
[Guest]: Maybe this is a cricket thing, because there is money in cricket in that sense. So you
[Guest]: do get that response now more and more from people. But I think what also happens, the
[Guest]: other side of sport that you learn is that maybe it teaches you this sort of day in and
[Guest]: day out of defeat and, you know, reversal of fortune is that you almost internalize
[Guest]: the fact that you're going to have a shit day, you're going to lose more than you win.
[Guest]: Not everybody is federal. Someone is 703 in the ATP rankings, you know. So that also comes
[Guest]: into maybe your psyche as to what kind of person you are. As you grow older, maybe you
[Guest]: sort of get used to it. I remember, I had gone to do a story, I became after some point,
[Guest]: you know, I was I did four years at ESPN India, the website, it was just the most fantastic
[Guest]: thing because I had to be wean myself away from cricket, which I love, you know, I can
[Guest]: watch anything competitive, like I say, I can watch football, I was watching the I-League,
[Guest]: the last two round games that were going on. And I can watch Indian football without, a
[Guest]: lot of people say, what is this? And you know, they get all snobbish and all that, but I
[Guest]: love watching. So I remember going to Assam, I was going to do a story, this I went off
[Guest]: from Guwahati towards Abbayapuri, and there was this little center that's run in Bondapara
[Guest]: by a very famous police officer of that region, famous of that region. And I was talking to
[Guest]: him and we were taking pictures and he gets all these kids to come from everywhere and
[Guest]: all that. And this guy turns up and he is this man in a banyan and a lungi, scrawny,
[Guest]: thin fellow. And he turns up and he said, oh, he's so and so, he used to be a great
[Guest]: player from this region. And he was like this. He was like, he was just like an average everyman.
[Guest]: And he was so proud to tell me about his life as a player at that time. He used to go and
[Guest]: play in these little tournaments all around the state. He said, I've gone to Calcutta
[Guest]: and played, I've played against, and he named some famous players from Mohun Bagan. And
[Guest]: he has this very average normal life. I think his name was Ratan something, if I can find
[Guest]: it, I'll find it and tell you. And I was just struck by the fact that this man's gains from
[Guest]: sport had been nothing financially massive. I mean, he lives in this little town in Assam
[Guest]: somewhere, but he was an athlete. He was proud of being an athlete, you know. And I don't
[Guest]: think you can play at competitive level without having a streak of that competitiveness in
[Guest]: you, because you'll just get brushed aside by the next tougher person than you and the
[Guest]: more committed person than you. So he must have had some level, some spirit of cussedness
[Guest]: in him that had him compete. But he was not sort of elite level of any level. He wasn't
[Guest]: elite level even in his spot in the region. You know, there would have been some 25 players
[Guest]: ahead of him from Calcutta. But to see him, he was completely comfortable in his own skin.
[Guest]: So I think maybe that works its way all across in sport, in the entire ecosystem, that you
[Guest]: have this mass of players. I remember meeting gymnasts from Tripura, these guys who are
[Guest]: from Agartala themselves. Again, not names that you know at all, you know, not even their
[Guest]: most famous gymnasts before Deepak. They were just sort of one level below that. And they
[Guest]: were telling me about their love of gymnastics and how they saw it for the first time. So
[Guest]: we walked in, they went to see some exhibition from some Russian gymnasts that had come in
[Guest]: the 70s or 60s or something, I forgot. And they said it was like we saw men flying, you
[Guest]: know, and he would have been about 65, 70 years old, but he could still remember that
[Guest]: magic, you know. And he said, we used to train by trying and diving into, he said, we didn't
[Guest]: have a landing spot when we were training for the vault. So we used to train at the
[Guest]: edge of a lake and then we would jump into the lake was our landing place. And you hear
[Guest]: all these stories and you say, you know, they are as, to me, they're as important as all
[Guest]: the other stuff that you hear. So, because I think particularly with competitive sportsmen,
[Guest]: there does tend to be a little philosophy. I'm saying maybe, of course, there'll be bitter
[Guest]: stories. In hockey, you'll find tons of bitter stories, you know, I think. Because 100%,
[Guest]: at least 50 hockey players will crib about whatever. And in proportion, maybe 300 ticket
[Guest]: players will just crib, you know. So maybe it's the other, the other lesson that you
[Guest]: learn from sport that teaches you to deal with adversity, in a sense, you know, because
[Guest]: eventually at some place, everybody will hit some wall, everybody will come against some
[Guest]: obstacle, you know. I have a great Tendulkar story to tell you, but I'll tell you later.
[Guest]: Now you got to tell me now, because otherwise my listeners will just start fast forwarding
[Guest]: through when is the Tendulkar story. Let's get it over with.
[Guest]: Because when you're talking about this competitiveness, you know, this is, I'm talking about Tendulkar,
[Guest]: the Mr. Tendulkar himself. So he, there was some interview that I did with him about,
[Guest]: which was on his birthday. I think the last important birthday that there was, 45. Anyway,
[Guest]: I spoke with him, very, very good interview. We chatted. I said, would you have liked to
[Guest]: have played all these freaky shots that they play in IPL? And he said, no, I don't need
[Guest]: to play shots like that. You know, I would have been fine with the shots at hand. I'm
[Guest]: like, yeah, yeah, I'm not going to argue with you. And at one point, he started discussing
[Guest]: the new, the new format. This is just incredible. The new format of the new rules in one day
[Guest]: cricket, two new balls. And he was saying, remember two new balls and only two fielders
[Guest]: outside the circle, which means every time I get the ball past the 30 yard circle, I
[Guest]: can take two runs. That means I get the strike back. So it's like literally, he's still living
[Guest]: all those runs that he didn't score. And I was saying, boss, you have made hundreds and
[Guest]: hundreds. You have made thousands and tens of thousands of runs. But he still remembers
[Guest]: that, you know, don't mess around with me. Imagine what I could have scored when I had
[Guest]: had this kind of this thing. I just loved the story because he was still a child again.
[Guest]: No, he was still a young cricketer. He was still a 16 year old cricketer saying, boss,
[Guest]: I'm going to max these rules now. You just wait. And I thought, so that is competitiveness.
[Guest]: You know, that is competitiveness. Even at the, when you would think he has achieved
[Guest]: everything that there is to achieve, he's still looking at those two new balls and said,
[Guest]: you lucky guys these days, you have no idea. And he was remembering instances where he
[Guest]: was in partnership with Lakshman. He said, I was in really good nick. And I kept telling
[Guest]: him, take two, take two, so I get the strike back. You know, I said, no, Lakshman is not
[Guest]: the fastest man between wickets and everything. And it was just such a sweet story to listen
[Guest]: to with this. He had completely, he was into this whole thing that how can I imagine if
[Guest]: I, if the rules are there like that for me. And everyone you talk to, they said, yes,
[Guest]: you talk to any player of that generation and they'll tell you the same thing. They
[Guest]: said, absolutely. Just, you just double up his runs and see how many runs he could have
[Guest]: made like that. So people speaking on his behalf as well. So that is what is a competitiveness
[Guest]: of a level that we can't even comprehend. It's like you, you live your life and you
[Guest]: think, okay, my career's over. I'm sitting quietly. No, I am not. I'm thinking of the
[Guest]: runs I didn't make, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. So legend there as well. So thinking aloud from something that you just said, you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how you love watching any sport, you know, so it's not just, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: what I think tends to happen to most of us as fans is that we'll watch just the highest
[Unknown]: level of a sport. So if I'm watching cricket, I'll watch it between countries with football
[Unknown]: clubs, with football, it'll be, you know, between the top clubs and maybe the World
[Amit Varma]: Cup and so on. But it strikes me now that in a sense, that's only because it's the highest
[Amit Varma]: there is in the sense that I love watching women's cricket as well. Now, would say someone
[Amit Varma]: like Smriti Mandhana be able to play Jasprit Bumrah, you know, not so well, perhaps. But
[Amit Varma]: to me, that's a pointless question and it's moot because it doesn't matter. Like the thought
[Amit Varma]: experiment I come up with is let's say there's a race of aliens who are better than humans
[Amit Varma]: at everything by 20% and otherwise exactly the same. And they come down here and they
[Amit Varma]: play cricket, right? So now their cricket is going to be a much higher quality than
[Amit Varma]: our cricket, but I will still watch our cricket. And therefore, like whatever sport you actually
[Amit Varma]: get to see, what matters, I think, is not the absolute level of skill there is in it.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think it's safe to say that 100 years later, every sport will be played far
[Amit Varma]: better than it is today. You know, one can argue about sports of skills like badminton
[Amit Varma]: and cricket, but even those I believe that players of 100 years later will be far better
[Amit Varma]: than today. And yet today's is incredibly enthralling. So it really doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: You could be watching, you know, a colony match, so to say, though there goes the word
[Amit Varma]: colony again, and it could still be enthralling. So if it is not the actual standard of excellence
[Amit Varma]: in the specific sport that is drawing us, what do you think there is that makes a sport
[Amit Varma]: so riveting? I mean, part of it could, of course, be the stories that are sort of involved,
[Amit Varma]: the little dramas that we are focused on. But sometimes I could be passing a maidan
[Amit Varma]: and I could watch a game in progress and I don't know anybody there. But I'm still standing
[Amit Varma]: and watching because hey, it's not the highest quality. I'm not being able to make personal
[Guest]: connections. I'm still standing there and watching. What is it? Why are we like this?
[Guest]: Because we are all saddos. We are all saddos. We are tragics in that sense. Yeah, no, no.
[Guest]: Okay. So I mean, we're not saddos. I think we take to sport for various reasons. Some
[Guest]: people are good at competing and playing. Some people like myself, I know exactly how
[Guest]: bad I was and I know exactly how utterly atrocious, even like seasoned coaching would have made
[Guest]: me better by maybe 5%, but no more. And therefore, I think you appreciate the escalation of abilities
[Guest]: that there are. I mean, one of the most astonishing things for me in cricket very, very early
[Guest]: on used to be how far they can throw the ball. How far they can throw my shoulder is so useless.
[Guest]: I cannot even throw, you know, it was that. Again, I'm coming back to Tendulkar like a
[Guest]: proper fan, like a proper Tendulkar zamanika person that I remember a throw he did at the
[Guest]: Eden Gardens. He was on the side of where the press box is and where the, you know,
[Guest]: where that press box is. He picked up, I think Afridi was the batsman, he picked the ball
[Guest]: up from the boundary and he threw it to the wicketkeeper's end, which is the other end
[Guest]: of it. And he ran him out, you know, and I'm just saying this guy is like five feet, whatever
[Guest]: inches tall. How did he throw like that? So it's all these little, little snatches, I
[Guest]: think of maybe action or the physical expression of what is high quality training plus ability,
[Guest]: plus muscle memory, whatever, whatever working that you want to see. It's aesthetically appealing
[Guest]: in one sense. And I think I'll watch everything competitive because maybe it's the, you know,
[Guest]: slightly mumbo-jumbo, maybe it's the energies that we're looking at, maybe it's the energies
[Guest]: that we respond to as to what we are seeing, how urgent it is for everybody that it's there.
[Guest]: I remember I was watching a MotoGP on TV once, BRG and whatever, 250cc bike.
[Guest]: 1990s, I remember, I used to watch BRG as well.
[Guest]: Exactly. And I'm watching and my mother just passed me and she said, now this motorcycle
[Guest]: also you'll watch? So I said, of course, you know, it's a race, it's on TV. They could
[Guest]: almost fall off the motorcycle, but they don't. And then also the other thing is you have
[Guest]: to be an exceptional collector of pointless information as I am. I love to collect pointless
[Guest]: pieces of information and I'm watching, listening, doing whatever, whatever. So it's all those
[Guest]: other things that are going on, you know, and people do watch sport for the excellence
[Guest]: of it. I remember having a conversation with one of my colleagues, Anirudh, at ESPN. And
[Guest]: I said, you know, you watch a lot of Indian football and they are those absolutely high
[Guest]: level, like serious club watchers and Manchester United and everything. And I don't watch that
[Guest]: much. I'll watch once in a while. So I said, but why do you watch Indian football? Because
[Guest]: the standard is so bad. He said, no, because I like to watch it because it's football.
[Guest]: It's still football. You know, that's what I see. It's football cranked down at the speed
[Guest]: different to what you see, but it's the same sport. And I think when you watch all ranges
[Guest]: of it, you can see how it's almost like you don't understand how difficult something is
[Guest]: until you see it being done with the eyes and you realize how difficult it is to excel
[Guest]: at that stage. I remember I had gone to Melbourne for two months to work on a project. It was
[Guest]: a fellowship and fantastic, fantastic fellowship. And the office which I had, it was next to
[Guest]: a music school. The University of Melbourne's music school was there. And you could hear
[Guest]: people practicing every day. So they were practicing the saxophone. They were practicing
[Guest]: the trombone, the piano. There was one guy with the saxophone. He was trying to practice
[Guest]: summertime, you know, the summertime, the first few bars of summertime. And he was struggling
[Guest]: to get it right, but he was in the school, right? So he must be a seriously good student.
[Guest]: And you could just hear his effort in making sure that those notes came out clean. And
[Guest]: that's when you understood that when they played in those orchestras and when they're
[Guest]: playing it, they're just flawless and it looks easy, but it's not easy. So you were hearing
[Guest]: the difficult happening in front of your, you know, you could hear the difficult happening
[Guest]: all the time. And so maybe that's what you, you kind of understand when you see sport
[Guest]: at across levels, you know, when you see sport across a quality sort of stages, that's when
[Guest]: you understand is that this is what it is for people better than you. And that is what
[Guest]: it is for people that are just of another level of training or, you know, practice or
[Guest]: whatever it is. And that music example really, really struck me because I recognized the
[Guest]: tune immediately. And this guy was like, guy, girl, whoever, was just like struggling to
[Guest]: get it out perfect. And when they got out those three lines perfect, you could almost
[Guest]: hear the exhalation from their head when they just stopped for two seconds. And we literally
[Guest]: were separated by a wall. I could hear it every day. It was terrific. It was a great,
[Guest]: great insight when I'm writing and I'm listening and I'm listening. Oh, so they tried to play
[Guest]: this and there's two of them or three of them. There's a quartet or a trio or a string, you
[Guest]: know, string quartet. They're trying to do, they're trying to get it right. So in the
[Guest]: trying to get it right is where the fun and the magic sort of lies, you know, and then
[Guest]: what we see on, I have a friend who plays the piano. And when I told her this, she said,
[Guest]: yes, exactly. Now you get what I'm saying. I said, yes, now I do.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, there's an old cliche in cricket. He makes it look so easy. But and the fact
[Amit Varma]: is, everybody makes it look so easy. It's just kind of insane. And it's interesting
[Amit Varma]: how a stray half sentence can allow you to put a date on it. Like you said, BRG and 250
[Amit Varma]: CC. And the thing is, BRG was in 250 CC for a couple of years. And then he spent more
[Guest]: than a decade in 500 CC or the actual category. Yeah. Why do we remember him from 250? Because
[Amit Varma]: that's what I remember as well. Because those were the years India started showing those
[Unknown]: races. So the moment you said BRG, I thought of Loris Capirossi and Luca Cattelora. And
[Amit Varma]: I used to root for a guy called Pierre Francisco Keeley. And I have no idea why I rooted for
[Amit Varma]: him because I would not recognize any of them without the helmet. But it's just that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so it's some particular moment of drama where you decide I want to support an underdog
[Amit Varma]: and this guy is an underdog and you're just going for it. Here's my next question. Now,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you were and again, we'll come back to the personal a little later. But another
[Amit Varma]: sort of tangential question. You mentioned that, you know, when you grew up in Bandhup,
[Amit Varma]: in your community, you know, people, these sporting events were a big deal.
[Guest]: It's actually called an estate. Estate, which sounds even crazier than colony. You're wondering
[Guest]: that, you know, and you keep trying to sort of tone down the sort of proprietary and sort
[Guest]: of perviousness of this whole colony, estate thing. Boss, they were flats together. Yeah,
[Guest]: come on. You know, so yeah, it was called GKW Westside Estate. It was not called colony.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Amazing. So all GKW Westside Estate residents of the past or present can leave
[Amit Varma]: a comment on Twitter tagging Sharda. So here's my question. You pointed out that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: at that point, sports was such a big deal. And these events were such a big deal, because
[Amit Varma]: it was the only entertainment you had 70s, like what else? What else are you gonna do?
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of got me to thinking about, you know, whether the way that we follow sport
[Amit Varma]: and the reasons that sport becomes big for us, have changed over the decades, like just
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud, let me try and list out a bunch of reasons why people get drawn to sport.
[Amit Varma]: One is that it is the only entertainment, it's a social thing, you're out there, you're
[Amit Varma]: playing with each other, you're competing. Then there is you tie sport into larger narratives,
[Amit Varma]: very often, and sometimes in a toxic way to these nationalistic narratives, like for so
[Amit Varma]: many cricket fans, you know, the 80s were a decade of such pain, because we would keep
[Amit Varma]: losing to Pakistan and Sharjah. And you can also find personal resonances there. Like
[Amit Varma]: I can imagine that so many people like me must have been so switched on to someone like
[Amit Varma]: Rahul Dravid, because you are seeing, you know, so much character there and so much
[Amit Varma]: of what you would like to, you know, do or be in your own life, in your own context,
[Amit Varma]: and that can switch you on. And at another level, you know, I often find it weird that
[Amit Varma]: so many Indians who've never been to England will have loyalties for Manchester United
[Amit Varma]: or Liverpool or whatever. But one kind of reason is that when you are at that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: formative age of 13 or 14, or whatever these studies are found, whichever club is doing
[Amit Varma]: well, you tend to become a loyalist, which is why you can almost aid someone by seeing
[Amit Varma]: is he a Liverpool supporter? Is he an Arsenal supporter? Or United or City? Yeah, so the
[Amit Varma]: younger people, the kids who are 13 today will be City and a new generation of Liverpool
[Amit Varma]: supporters as well. So the way that Indians follow sport, has it changed over these decades?
[Amit Varma]: Because also, it's been commercialised, it's become both larger than life and in your face.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, if you remember 10-15 years ago, when you'd have these TV commercials
[Amit Varma]: of Star Sports for India, Pakistan series and all that, there was so much jingoism thrown
[Amit Varma]: in it was almost part of the kind of marketing. So has the way that Indians follow sport changed
[Amit Varma]: over the decades in your experience? Is it more toxic? You know, I mean, obviously, it's
[Amit Varma]: better for sports people, because they make more money, and there are more opportunities
[Amit Varma]: for them. But, you know, how does it play into everything else that is happening around
[Amit Varma]: us and nationalism, the politics, and even the non-negative things, non-negative water,
[Amit Varma]: you know, my writing class students will kill me for using non-negative. But even the sort
[Amit Varma]: of the happier things like aspiration, and, you know, striving to be better and to make
[Amit Varma]: a place in the world and all of those things. What's your sense of, you know,
[Guest]: I think there's been a huge change in the Indian cricket ethos, if you have to call
[Guest]: it that, over the last, say, 25 years. I mean, you will remember this, Amit, that when we
[Guest]: were growing up, like you're saying, 70s, 80s, same, same, no difference. You know,
[Guest]: there was a certain value attached to fairness, and attached to I'm sounding so old fashioned
[Guest]: and so boomer, it is like not funny, sort of attached to sort of fairness and a sense
[Guest]: of, you know, the whole thing, oh, Indians are very nice, and they only shake hands and
[Guest]: say, you know, they're very well behaved and everything. And it wasn't seen as a bad thing.
[Guest]: But it became seen as something that should not be, or Srinath is apologizing to the batsman
[Guest]: for hitting him or something like that, you know. And you're saying, so that, for Indian
[Guest]: cricket to sort of shake itself out of this different, almost self effacing mode that
[Guest]: it was in, when you look, when we looked at it, when we were in our 20s and our 30s, and
[Guest]: you said, yeah, enough of this crap that we're taking from England and whatever, England
[Guest]: mostly not Pakistan, you know, it was basically our generation was we are getting crap from
[Guest]: England, Pakistan is okay, they have better fast bowlers than we do, you know, but that
[Guest]: has now morphed into this other thing of new India. Every five years, there is new India,
[Guest]: you know, that new India never stops. That has become and because the moment you came
[Guest]: into money, have you read this complete digression? Have you read Vivek Shanbhag's Gachar Gochar?
[Guest]: It's marvelous. It's a beautiful novel. In fact, I talk about it. Yeah, in which he has
[Guest]: this great line. And he said, we think we control money. He said, no, money controls
[Guest]: us. When we have little money, it sits quietly in our pocket, behaving itself. When we have
[Guest]: a lot of money, it just acts tough. And that's so and literally, that's what has happened
[Guest]: in Indian cricket. You can see it, you know, with, and I remember, I'm just looking back
[Guest]: at it now. And I remember Dalmia sort of whatever Dalmia's great non virtues were. You know,
[Guest]: he was, you're looking at it, he's fighting for more countries to be playing, okay, their
[Guest]: votes to him, but he's able to do that cricket going to more places. He was on the side of
[Guest]: Sri Lankans and Pakistanis and Hamari Kaum as they say, the subcontinent. And you're
[Guest]: looking at these guys now and you're saying like, what, why have we become this? So it's
[Guest]: almost like that when money has come in, you have not only changed what you want, how you
[Guest]: want the world to see you, which of course it will. But you have also changed how you
[Guest]: want to basically be, what you want to basically stand for, you know, and the marvellousness
[Guest]: and the beauty of Indian cricket is that in and in the subcontinent is that you have changed
[Guest]: the nature of what the game started out as, as this English pastime played in an orderly
[Guest]: manner into this on the streets, everybody's playing at all times, 24 seven, all seasons
[Guest]: of the year, we play cricket. You've changed it, you've changed the language, you've changed
[Guest]: the idiom, your batsmen have changed so many things and not just Ranji, your bowlers have
[Guest]: changed so many definitions of and sort of the limit and the range or the boundaries
[Guest]: of their skill have also been changed. What you want to do now is we walk around in a,
[Guest]: in a Hugo Boss suit and kick people around, you know. So I'm just saying, it's just, that's
[Guest]: the change that I see in Indian cricket and it's been fed, the IPL has only amplified it.
[Guest]: Remember you were talking about, you can watch women's cricket and men's cricket. Similarly,
[Guest]: you can watch IPL and you can watch Test cricket. They're two different things. You have to
[Guest]: just accept that. Once you accept that, you can watch it. And I have come to terms with
[Guest]: it and now I'm, I'm sort of a game. So, so the IPL sort of amplified this as well. And
[Guest]: I was talking to somebody about the 99 Chennai Test match and that scene in which the fans
[Guest]: were applauding for the Pakistani players. And because 90s had been such a terrible decade
[Guest]: in terms of the animosity that had been built up, the Shiv Sena had dug up the page, there
[Guest]: was all this vakwas that was going on, Babri Masjid, all the other shit that was going
[Guest]: on. And to see this, it's like, you're so relieved that there is this, this basic decency
[Guest]: that is still there. I'm sure there is decency still left in Indian fans and in Indian crowds
[Guest]: and whatever. But now if you've got scenes like you have in, you know, the Ahmedabad
[Guest]: wicket and all the furor that came about, even talking about whether that wicket was
[Guest]: good or not, you're looking and saying, you know, will that decency even be appreciated?
[Guest]: What will happen to it? Could that ever happen again? No. And what is wrong with it? That
[Guest]: it cannot, it should not happen again. That the Pakistanis should not play, any competitor,
[Guest]: if you're saying, any rival or opponent. What will it be seen if you stand up and applaud
[Guest]: a batsman from the other team for doing anything, batsman, bowler, for doing anything terrific?
[Guest]: But you would think that, I don't know, I mean, I suppose the commentators would just
[Guest]: sort of improvise. But I'm saying that has been fairly unpleasant. Of course, India's
[Guest]: money that is in the game that is there is also great. But like, I keep quoting that
[Guest]: Anil Kumble's speech in which he said, you have to wear your leadership lightly, you
[Guest]: know, you have to wear your power lightly. He said that in, I think it was his Pataudi
[Guest]: memorial speech. So he said, you have to wear your, but we are not wearing it lightly. And
[Guest]: the moment Indian cricket takes that step that is not going to wear its leadership lightly,
[Guest]: it's going to wear it to the big stick, the fans and the TV kind of builds it up into
[Guest]: the fans that are doing this. And I remember very early on when satellite television had
[Guest]: just come into India, and you'll also remember that, I remember watching these promos, and
[Guest]: thinking here, they are making them very grand, like it's a big fight, and this and that,
[Guest]: and a great production. This is called marketing. And now I'm looking at everything and saying,
[Guest]: what is this? Stop it. You know, this is terrible. So everything is being projected like it's
[Guest]: a WWE sort of a that pitch, you know, it's been projected at that pitch. And so you lose
[Guest]: a lot of what are the good qualities about it. Maybe you don't lose them, but you kind
[Guest]: of push them in the background because they don't really sell, you know. So that's my
[Guest]: general sort of feeling of what is publicly projected about Indian cricket and proudly
[Guest]: projected and been made into this celebration of I don't know what, money, basically.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and many strands. And again, what you said about the IPL, I of course agree with
[Amit Varma]: you. I tried to, you know, when Ram was on my show a few months back, I tried to convince
[Amit Varma]: him to get into the IPL because, like, you know, like you said, it's two separate sports.
[Amit Varma]: And I consider myself both a cricket tragic and a T20 fanatic. And I think it's changed
[Unknown]: the game in so many great ways, which is, you know, like this Test Series we just won
[Amit Varma]: against Australia, part of it is, you know, part of this debt is because of IPL. You can't,
[Guest]: you know, exchange the incentives for everyone. Can't deny. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I don't know
[Guest]: whether we can say this, sorry, this is my very bad habit. However, I have not interrupted
[Amit Varma]: you more than once, no, twice. It's a miracle. No, no, feel free. You can interrupt me. It
[Amit Varma]: can't be the other way around, though I just did. Yeah, I don't know. That's okay. So,
[Guest]: I don't know whether you can put it, it'll be too late. I actually wrote a column for
[Guest]: the Hindustan Times, hopefully it'll be published tomorrow, day after, in which I've asked Rahul
[Guest]: Dravid to tell the naysayers of IPL to sell it to them and say, come on, what should they
[Guest]: watch? What should they see? Whatever, you know, so that, I said, let me try it this
[Guest]: way. Let me see if it works, if it helps. I don't know, you know, if it'll help or not.
[Guest]: That should be the ultimate sort of, what I call him, the most woke cricket person that
[Guest]: anybody knows. Come on, Rahul Dravid is telling you to watch, man, watch properly. Yeah, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: it's a fantastic sport, but it's a different sport. It's like comparing badminton and tennis,
[Guest]: T20 and Testicate. It's a racket, it's a net, but you know, otherwise. Or ball badminton
[Guest]: and badminton badminton. I don't know. I have not seen much ball badminton to be an expert.
[Amit Varma]: Now since in the last few minutes, we have mentioned both decency and Rahul Dravid, which
[Amit Varma]: kind of go together. Let me ask you a question about the importance of role models like one
[Amit Varma]: of the things that we have, for example, that we see in tennis, and we are very lucky about
[Amit Varma]: tennis is that Federer and Nadal are both such incredible role models. They're just
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally decent human beings. And, you know, very wholesome in every way. And we've
[Amit Varma]: been lucky to have people like that in Indian cricket as well like Dravid and Komle. But
[Amit Varma]: by and large, one of the things that strikes me is that look, first of all, I think it
[Amit Varma]: often becomes a mistake when you expect someone who has excelled in one thing to also have
[Amit Varma]: something of value to contribute in other ways. And I feel we are often unfair to cricketers
[Amit Varma]: assuming that, you know, that their opinions on anything, whether it's politics or where
[Amit Varma]: should you invest or any of that stuff matters at all, because, you know, they've happened
[Amit Varma]: to excel in one thing. And that is random distribution, that skill and even that cussedness
[Amit Varma]: and all those qualities which get them there is random distribution, it is in fact, less
[Amit Varma]: likely they will be good at other things, because they would have spent less time on
[Amit Varma]: them. So they are even they're less likelier than the average person to know anything about
[Amit Varma]: any of those other things. So it's kind of unfair. It also strikes me that many fans
[Amit Varma]: have this kind of more nuanced appreciation of the game where it's not just about winning
[Amit Varma]: or defeat or these particular narratives that oh, we beat Pakistan or oh, they are the enemy
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, whatever, but they, they have these deeper nuanced narratives. And that
[Amit Varma]: kind of an approach, it also seems to me is randomly distributed, making it therefore
[Amit Varma]: likely that, you know, a hardcore fan will have that sort of approach than a cricketer
[Amit Varma]: himself, because all that a cricketer himself really has got is the talent and I'm including
[Amit Varma]: that cussedness and all of the mentality as part of the talent, which actually means that
[Amit Varma]: many cricketers like one, we make a mistake by placing that burden on them that you have
[Amit Varma]: to be all of these things. How is it for them to kind of cope? I mean, the smart thing,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, is just to stay away from everything else and just talk about cricket. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: people blame Sachin for not speaking up at various times for whatever. But in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: I understand he's not commenting on any other domain or talking about anything else, because
[Amit Varma]: the one good thing he knows is cricket, why not just speak about that and stick there.
[Amit Varma]: So how do sports people look at this? Do they sort of have the self awareness to also kind
[Amit Varma]: of be aware of this? Like, one of the things I talk about when I'm teaching my writing
[Amit Varma]: class is the importance of humility and achieving excellence. So even if someone like a Virat
[Amit Varma]: Kohli comes across as an extremely arrogant person, the truth is that when you are in
[Amit Varma]: the nets, and when you're putting in those 1000s of hours in the nets, you're actually
[Amit Varma]: incredibly humble, because you're focusing on your mistakes. You know, where is my footwork
[Amit Varma]: going wrong? Where's my balance going wrong, blah, blah, all those little nuances of the
[Amit Varma]: game. And the self awareness there when it comes to your field is incredible. Does it
[Amit Varma]: extend to outside of that? Does celebrity become a burden for the elite sports person?
[Amit Varma]: And even the nature of that celebrity has changed in all the years that you've been
[Amit Varma]: covering cricket from back in the 80s, where you know, you could just approach someone
[Amit Varma]: like at one point, you said that, you know, in the 80s, when you were a student at Xavier's,
[Amit Varma]: you interviewed so many big names, and all you do is call up the hotel and say, you know,
[Amit Varma]: leave a message for them and you'd get through and today like good luck doing that. So how
[Amit Varma]: has that changed the nature of celebrity and how sports people deal with it? And is it
[Amit Varma]: incredibly difficult and just thinking allowed to add one more tangent to that, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me and I think Harsha Bhogle, when he was on my show once kind of mentioned that so
[Amit Varma]: many of our cricketers from that generation were from the middle class. And they had these
[Amit Varma]: kind of middle class values about how they should behave and all of that your Kumles
[Amit Varma]: and Ravids and Lakshmans and so on. And that where those values don't exist, it can be
[Amit Varma]: a problem like it strikes me that, you know, Pakistan through the 80s, 90s, 80s, we would
[Amit Varma]: see these incredible talents come up and just blaze out. And part of the reason could be
[Amit Varma]: that they didn't have a bedrock of anything else to be able to cope with this sudden start.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry, I've kind of thrown in a bunch of sort of thoughts and questions, but
[Guest]: I mean, I just have a very interesting story. I know the whole thing of the sort of the
[Guest]: cricketers coming from a particular social economic class is seen as a big factor as
[Guest]: to how we behave. I must tell you this story and then you can place it wherever. This was
[Guest]: in 91 or so I was about to go to Sharjah to cover some tournament, my first international
[Guest]: tournament for midday, very excited. And I had gone to meet the Vinod Kamble's family.
[Guest]: They used to live in Kanjurma, sort of the suburb just before Bhandup on that line. And
[Guest]: his father used to work in the garage at Gheskin Williams. So everyone knew Ganpat Kamble's
[Guest]: son has made it, you know, they found out. So I went to meet his family and saw their
[Guest]: house and you know, the usual story that you go and talk to the parents and this and that.
[Guest]: So the mother asked me, she said, are you going to Sharjah? And I think the team had
[Guest]: already left or they were leaving, he was in the hotel, whatever. So Kamble was not
[Guest]: around, I just met the parents. And his mother said, are you going to Gulf or whatever she
[Guest]: called it. So I said, yeah, I'm going. She said, just tell Vinod that his mother said
[Guest]: he should just behave himself and talk nicely to people. You know, so to say that they come
[Guest]: from there and that they don't have any kind of values, it's a bit, I don't really agree,
[Guest]: you know. I don't think that's the point. I don't think
[Guest]: Harsha meant it in that sense. But I'm just, I'm just putting it out there to talk about
[Guest]: this, to talk about what you said. That's the first thing that came to mind. And I remember
[Guest]: that so clearly because I didn't write it in the story, I didn't do anything, but it
[Guest]: just stayed in my head. And so that is one thing. And you're saying the sort of difficulties
[Guest]: of celebrity, at the same time, there's a huge advantage of being a celebrity, particularly
[Guest]: a cricketer in India. We've seen how social media has been part of their whole kind of
[Guest]: environment and growing up. And I mean, in no way denying what you're talking about,
[Guest]: the humility when it comes to their sport, you know, like you're saying about Kohli being
[Guest]: completely dedicated to his craft, he's completely dedicated to his craft. But in my mind, because
[Guest]: social media is involved, if you're selling things on social media using your name and
[Guest]: your fame and whatever, then for people to expect you to talk about other things outside
[Guest]: of cricket, because you're turning up to promote a movie, a movie star, a product or whatever,
[Guest]: then it's almost like that the fans have a right to question you and what do you have
[Guest]: to say about this? And it usually happens in every country's most prominent sport across
[Guest]: the world. Their most prominent athletes are asked these questions. You know, I don't think
[Guest]: anyone is going to ask the English cricketers about Brexit. I was thinking about this, you
[Guest]: know, about the political, no one's going to ask Joe Root about Brexit. But you have
[Guest]: the Marcus Rashford story as to what he's doing in terms of, you know, the issues that
[Guest]: he's pointing out. So I think a certain self-awareness of maybe not political issues, but I think
[Guest]: maybe social deprivation around them in India, you would expect players to understand it
[Guest]: and feel it a lot more because they come, they are surrounded by that kind of an environment
[Guest]: where they have like toughed their way out all the way to the top. So I'm thinking that
[Guest]: if you are in the social media circus, if you're in that entire cavalcade that is going
[Guest]: on, you can't pretend that there is nothing else that you will be asked to answer for.
[Guest]: You can be a role model of your sport. Absolutely fine. We would just be grateful if you didn't.
[Guest]: This is another thing. Again, when I was younger, I thought it was quite cool for athletes to
[Guest]: be abusing each other and saying whatever they want. And you know, general, oh, doing
[Guest]: their, and it's largely a male thing. You don't see women athletes go bananas usually.
[Guest]: To do that, you know, it was like, oh, they're having a fight and jhagda ho gaya and panga
[Guest]: ho gaya and all that kind of thing. But as you grow older, and as like, basically, I
[Guest]: don't have kids, my friends had kids, they said, we don't want to see these guys abusing
[Guest]: on TV, because our children are going to look at them and do this. I remember my nephew
[Guest]: taking off his, he was fine, some 7, 8, taking off his banyan and waving it around his head,
[Guest]: you know, so in response, and he kept asking me, he said, Maasi, what is he saying? What
[Guest]: is he saying? What is Saurav saying? I said, don't worry about what he's saying, you know,
[Guest]: after that Lord's shirt waving thing. So, you know, by and large, I think, in Indian
[Guest]: cricket, particularly, as when it comes to behaving well, when it comes to generally
[Guest]: not being sort of generally not wearing their bad boyness on their sleeves all the time,
[Guest]: I think our players are very, very good at it. You saw it in the series against Australia.
[Guest]: They didn't have to do anything. They didn't have to be, I mean, I find sledging to be
[Guest]: purposeless, meaningless. I've written lots about it. I think it's just absolutely faalto.
[Guest]: And it's pointless. And there's so much of it, like, it has no if, it just goes over
[Guest]: your head. I mean, SS Das once said in that 2001 series, he said, I don't understand what
[Guest]: the Australians are saying. All I could hear them was going fa fa fa fa fa in my face. I
[Guest]: didn't pick up a single word. So they could have been saying whatever they wanted. I couldn't
[Guest]: understand anything. So in the sense of being the role models around their particular sport,
[Guest]: I think they are very good. They sort of literally are within the lines, within the boundaries.
[Guest]: I don't know if for all his mischievousness, I don't know if Rishabh Pant would have done
[Guest]: what Quintin de Kock did two days ago. I don't think so. So we can discuss that later.
[Amit Varma]: I completely miss Quintin de Kock. What did Quintin de Kock do?
[Guest]: Quintin de Kock sort of signaled to his fielder, this was Fakhar Zaman, was basically cruising,
[Guest]: going to get Pakistan over the line. It's like he told the fielder at the other end,
[Guest]: the bowler's end, and actually he meant it. So Fakhar Zaman stopped, he wasn't going as
[Guest]: fast. He thought he had to like really make a sprint. He turned around to see, he turned
[Guest]: out to look at the other end, he was running towards where de Kock was. And he turned around
[Guest]: to look because he saw de Kock pointing the other way. De Kock ran him out. So it's basically
[Guest]: the answer. Now they're talking about gamesmanship, deliberately trying to, so they say, no, no,
[Guest]: it's fine. You didn't try to mislead the batsmen and so on. So I'm saying for all Rishabh
[Guest]: Pant's mischievousness, I don't think he would do that. So I'm saying in that context, I
[Guest]: think role model wise, in terms of what the rules are, how cricket is meant to be run,
[Guest]: how it's meant to be organized, I think the Indian players are very good. At the most,
[Guest]: they'll appeal a little bit, but now because of DRS, you can appeal as much as you want,
[Guest]: nothing happens. So that way they're fine. Should they not be asked about things outside
[Guest]: their domain? Perhaps not. But if they're going to offer you their opinions on other
[Guest]: things like biscuits and clothes and the latest motorcycle, then you would have to say, because
[Guest]: you are present in social media in such an active way, you will be asked other things.
[Guest]: Your fans will ask you because you're engaging in this chatter with them. You want them to
[Guest]: buy stuff. You want to become an influencer. You get paid for putting up tweets. So which
[Guest]: is why that whole Hardik Pandya, Kehel Rahul thing became like one big bust up and blow
[Guest]: up when they went to Karan Johar's talk show. So that will happen because in social media,
[Guest]: if you're engaging and talking to people all the time, they will sometimes ask you the
[Guest]: uncomfortable question. If you're not there at all, I mean, you're living your life out
[Guest]: in public virtually. You're seeing people getting married, babies, family. It's great.
[Guest]: Fans love it, you know, but that's the other side of it.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, yeah, I feel a little bad for Rahul in that particular instance, because what
[Amit Varma]: are the poor guys that do? He was just sitting there, got dragged into it. But it's kind
[Amit Varma]: of interesting because, you know, I think modern social media works in two directions.
[Amit Varma]: And one direction, of course, is that cricketers will learn to have filters about what they
[Amit Varma]: say. So it is unlikely that a Hardik Pandya of the future will make that kind of mistake
[Amit Varma]: again. And the other angle is that it... But who's the manager who let him go on the show?
[Guest]: My first question is, who's the manager who told him to go? That's also there. Anyone
[Guest]: in the right mind would say, boss, be careful. You know, this is not your thing. You will
[Guest]: just be in over your head. Don't get into it. All the managers are saying, go, go, you
[Amit Varma]: will get a lot of numbers. But you know, it'll increase your profile. When you're a young
[Guest]: star, you think you're never going to be over your head. As if the young star will go with
[Guest]: his manager doesn't tell him to go. You know, my whole thing is who's advising these guys?
[Guest]: Who's giving these guys advice? Who's telling them these things? You know, and because this
[Guest]: generation is so much out there because of social media, but maybe they don't care. Maybe
[Guest]: they see what these two old people are talking about. We don't care. It's over.
[Amit Varma]: No, but there's actually a countervailing angle here. One angle, of course, is that
[Amit Varma]: you need a filter because shit like this happens and you don't know better. But the other angle
[Amit Varma]: is that social media actually rewards authenticity. And when done right, it's wonderful. Like
[Guest]: Ashwin's YouTube channel, for example. Yeah, yeah. You know, we didn't have to do any work
[Amit Varma]: for months. All the mehla we had to do, he just gave it. Thank you.
[Guest]: It could. In fact, we asked who needs Sharda Ugra if cricketers are going to start doing
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: No, no. Siddharth Pedinathan says, boss, when you lose, boss, you're not going to be putting
[Amit Varma]: out any videos now, are you?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, actually, he might. But no, but it's very interesting because one of the things
[Guest]: that I think creators have realized in this.
[Guest]: As they say, Mumbai cricket chants each night.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I think creators have realized in this new sort of age of social media and
[Amit Varma]: all of this is that authenticity is valued. So this kind of goes against that, that on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, you want Hardik Pandya to STFU, as it were. But on the other hand, you do
[Amit Varma]: want Ashwin to speak his mind out and be completely open and not have filters. Yes. So it's it's
[Amit Varma]: kind of an interesting challenge there. So, you know, we left your personal journey when
[Amit Varma]: you were a child. That's shocking. So let's take a quick commercial break. And when we
[Amit Varma]: come back, because remember, you are the focus. So we shall come back and cleverly moved on
[Guest]: to Max Biagi. See how easy it was.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you know, it's almost a thrilling moment to find that, you know, in that one
[Amit Varma]: year, when, which is the only year that I watched the sport, you were also watching
[Amit Varma]: the sport. It's almost like a thrilling connect, you know, who would have thunk that Max Biagi
[Amit Varma]: will form this kind of a thread. Yeah. So let's take a quick commercial break and we'll
[Amit Varma]: see you on the other side.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com,
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Sharda Ogra about her delightful
[Amit Varma]: life, a brief sporting career and how she kind of moved on into journalism from there.
[Amit Varma]: So we so far we know that you're a really good fielder and terrific. Terrific. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: you're a terrific fielder and middle of the batsman. Like it seems to me you were in your
[Amit Varma]: colony team. What say Atul Berede was to the Indian team many years later. Is that fair?
[Amit Varma]: Easily droppable. Easily droppable. I'm already feeling bad. We are treating Berede like he's
[Amit Varma]: Sayan or something. Poor guy. What has he done? Yeah. But listen, Sayan. Don't mess
[Amit Varma]: with Sayan. Yeah, really nice place. Don't mess with Sayan. Don't even mess with Berede.
[Amit Varma]: One of the unluckiest Indian players ever because 10 years later, if he appeared, he'd
[Guest]: be an IPL superstar. Correct. Absolute king. And like someone in Indian Express wrote a
[Amit Varma]: great piece that his name is the perfect name. Four and six. Oh, God, what a thing to write.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Okay. So let's let's kind of go back to your young years. And you know, so from
[Amit Varma]: that colony, you finally get into Xavier's and you're doing history there. And I'm interested
[Amit Varma]: in this that, you know, when I was chatting with our mutual friend Prem in the episode,
[Amit Varma]: he pointed out about how part of his love for storytelling came from the fact that when
[Amit Varma]: he was a kid, people were telling stories all the time. Yes. And would it be fair to
[Amit Varma]: say that, you know, you're taking history already indicates a prior interest in storytelling.
[Amit Varma]: And because you're winning prizes for magazine edited by Pritish Nandy and all that one can
[Amit Varma]: assume you already like to write. So tell me a little bit about the young storyteller
[Guest]: writer Sharda before cricket happens. You're right. I think that what I love most about
[Guest]: history as a subject was the stories that were told around it. My mother happens to
[Guest]: be a writer and a translator herself. And the other absolutely so tangential, it's not
[Guest]: funny, but I always use it is my great grand uncle was a very famous Urdu poet. So I am
[Guest]: fully taking advantage of all these things. You know, so and I am the one that's just
[Guest]: sort of descended in terms of standard. And now I'm only in English and all this is Urdu,
[Guest]: Hindi, high level, high level writing. So my mother worked for Amar Chitra Katha. She
[Guest]: used to translate and she used to write scripts. So I remember that happening all the time.
[Guest]: I remember comics coming which had her name script by Meera Ugra was there. And stories,
[Guest]: you know, we used to travel like all kids of that generation. We did not go to Pattaya
[Guest]: or Bali or wherever. We went where our grandparents used to stay. So I used to travel to Allahabad
[Guest]: and to Narsinghpur where my mother's parents were and Allahabad where my dad's parents
[Guest]: were. Again, houses full of books and many, many, many stories. And the towns and the
[Guest]: places themselves were stories. My mother's father, my Nana, he was in the freedom movement.
[Guest]: So we heard stories about that. Not in a boastful kind of way, but just sort of, you know, you're
[Guest]: hearing adults talking and they are recounting, you're hearing them recount the day Gandhi
[Guest]: was shot and what happened in that household at the time. You know, you're recounting the
[Guest]: day what happened to my mother's brother, my mama, my most favorite uncle who introduced
[Guest]: me to cricket, actually took me to my first match. He went for an RSS meeting, what his
[Guest]: father did to him was like unbelievable after that. So you heard all these other stories
[Guest]: about it. My father's father was in the civil service at the time. So he was working. So
[Guest]: you heard stories about how he would ride out into the countryside and have a tent and
[Guest]: set up camp and do all these things that workaholics in my family, like nobody's business. It's
[Guest]: just like a family trait, willing to work long hours and think that that was the way
[Guest]: life is to be lived by in that sense. So all these stories that were there, and because
[Guest]: you read Amar Chit Kathas and you heard stories, I always got taken into, I had a very good
[Guest]: history teacher at school as well. Now remember, this is an SSC school, and it's a very equitable
[Guest]: kind of a school. So you've got kids of all types in the class and all of us are learning
[Guest]: about Tanaji and Shivaji and the Kumbhalgarh fort and we're reading all these stories.
[Guest]: I just loved all that stuff. And we had a teacher, I can't remember which year it was,
[Guest]: we had gone to one of these, you know, trips that you'll go, it must have been some bussy
[Guest]: in Fort or some very close by would have gone. And they said, now imagine at that time what
[Guest]: this would have been like. And that kind of just switched my brain on into imagining things.
[Guest]: So it's the imagination, it's the things that you hear and the stories that you tell. That's
[Guest]: why I took history. Now, when I joined St. Xavier's College, I did 11th, 12th, and then
[Guest]: I took three papers history, three papers English, and anthropology, for the express
[Guest]: reason that the professors of anthropology and English were legends in St. Xavier's College,
[Guest]: Eunice D'Souza, who was the English teacher, and Father Marcia, who was the anthropology,
[Guest]: secondary anthropology person. So I said, I have to get maximum that I can out of them.
[Guest]: I really did not want to study either English literature, or anthropology, but I just wanted
[Guest]: to be in that class. And it was fabulous. I mean, Eunice taught us in the second year.
[Guest]: And I remember she was so angry that I had left English, and I chose history six papers
[Guest]: in the final year. But I always knew I was going to do history, because it had all these.
[Guest]: The history that interested me was much more modern, sort of post-Indian independence,
[Guest]: post-colonization. I remember strangely being intrigued by the Vietnam War stories. You
[Guest]: know, you would join the USIS, it was free. So you join USIS, you go to be a British Council
[Guest]: library, you do all these kinds of things, you get your sources of information from there.
[Guest]: I remember going to the USIS, and my friend and I went and watched West Side Story. You
[Guest]: know, there's a free film shows at some point, you go in the auditorium, and you see a classic
[Guest]: American film. We saw West Side Story at the end of it, we came out and said, they died?
[Guest]: What is this story that they died at the end? You know, we were just traumatized by the
[Guest]: fact that they had died. You know, we thought it'd be like some happy sort of kind of a
[Guest]: story. So it was sort of this kind of storytelling that I took to. And because my mother used
[Guest]: to write, and she always said, why don't you write a story? Why didn't you write? And I
[Guest]: would write really bad, crappy, horrible, endless, bad stories, I would write, but I
[Guest]: would write them. You know, I got good marks in English composition in school, but what
[Guest]: is that school that I'm telling you about? Remember, it's a room, and the teacher's cutting
[Guest]: hair and giving cake recipes to your mother and making, stitching dresses and all the
[Guest]: rest of it. So it was that kind of a thing. And I always knew that no matter what I did,
[Guest]: you should also remember that time, scope nahi tha. If you did arts, toh scope hi hai
[Guest]: nahi. Scope was a big thing for people. What is scope? You're doing arts, what is scope
[Guest]: of arts? Nothing is scope of arts. You study more, you do IAS. IAS was a big thing in my
[Guest]: family. They wanted me to do, to join the civil service. I didn't want to give so much
[Guest]: exam and all that. I couldn't study that much. I said, no, no, I'm not doing. I wanted to
[Guest]: seriously take up library science. Kuch nahi hoga, I will take up library science, full
[Guest]: I'll spend my life surrounded by books. And that'll be my job and whatever, if it doesn't
[Guest]: work out, if the journalism or advertising doesn't work out. And the other joke I tell
[Guest]: people is we had two, as humanities students, you had two choices, journalism or advertising.
[Guest]: Advertising, you sold biscuits, little bit low class, not a good cause. Journalism was
[Guest]: higher cause. So that's why you decided to cover cricket, which is like absolutely high
[Guest]: cause of all, you know, most meaningless profession going. And you wanted to write about sports.
[Guest]: So that's how I took to writing and to, and again, lots of reading, lots of listening,
[Guest]: a huge, huge, I mean, I remember this so clearly one on one of these train journeys we went
[Guest]: on at the AH Wheeler bookshop. My mother came back with a book, with a little book, very
[Guest]: excited cricket heroes or something like that. It was almost the size, not an A4 sheet, slightly
[Guest]: smaller. It had stories about Vinu Mankad, Alan Davidson, of course, Gary Sobers, Don
[Guest]: Bradman, all the big ones, but it had all this, Bapu Nadkarni and his maiden overs,
[Guest]: one chapter was on that. And you remember reading this, they are all stories, you know,
[Guest]: they're all tales that people tell you about the stuff that happened. So this is part of
[Guest]: folklore. These are, it's almost like reading about older, old cricket and what happened
[Guest]: at that time was like reading folklore. And I remember in Allahabad being introduced to
[Guest]: somebody who was a commentator. Again, I thought that was just like the greatest thing is the
[Guest]: radio, Skand Gupt, the Hindi commentator Skand Gupt. I was like, speechless. I couldn't see
[Guest]: anything because he's the, his is the voice that you heard on the radio telling you what's
[Guest]: happening in a particular game. So that was, that was sort of the whole, and fortunately
[Guest]: for me, I was not a very, very good student. So I was not like first class. I was like
[Guest]: fifth, sixth, seventh, like middle pressure from home to be any other kind of thing. You
[Guest]: know, they knew that that was my liking and that's what I did. And it was just allowed
[Guest]: to be, you know, and you're saying allowed now in a way that's sounding that it's almost
[Guest]: sounding gratuitous that all my parents are, but that is what, when you look at the lives
[Guest]: of other people, that is what happens. And you don't know how you would have responded
[Guest]: under other circumstances. You know, you realize how lucky you are in that sense. My brother,
[Guest]: the non-cricket fan was very good at maths and science and he did MBA. But my brother
[Guest]: also is a thinker by himself because he did maths and Sanskrit in his BA. Those are the
[Guest]: two papers that he took. I don't know why he took them, but he just chose maths and
[Guest]: Sanskrit along with economics. And he was allowed to do that at RUIA college. What I
[Guest]: said, you went to Mugu college, I went to St. Xavier's.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, he's a rich banker, you are the poor writers.
[Guest]: So exactly. So that's, that's where it started from. And I think the choice of journalism
[Guest]: was obviously there because it was the only sort of scope sort of choice that there was.
[Guest]: I joined the Xavier's Institute of Communication to do their diploma. I failed the feature
[Guest]: writing class, which I say so very proudly. That was an evening course. And in the morning,
[Guest]: what do you do? If you're staying in a student's hostel, you have to somehow make up an excuse
[Guest]: to not be in, you know. So I signed up for MA, which I never attended. I went two days,
[Guest]: I think, to Kalina campus. And I took Russian because it was the cheapest language to learn
[Guest]: at the time. So I learned a little bit of Russian for about four or five months. And
[Guest]: I entered that, you know, Indian Express, which you have these interns that they sign
[Guest]: up every time. So I went through that whole routine, me and a couple of friends of mine,
[Guest]: we went through this whole routine. And when Indian Express picked, I remember Erwin Manezes,
[Guest]: he was asking me, he said, who are your favorite writers? So he said, what do you read? So
[Guest]: like Arthur Haley and, no, no, Arthur Haley, who wrote those novels.
[Guest]: Airport and all that. I said, no, no, I read John Steinbeck, which is true. I used to read,
[Guest]: I was a big fan of Steinbeck. So, so I was thinking, what is this Arthur Haley? Anyway,
[Guest]: I didn't make that, I didn't make that class. I didn't make the intern, cut for the Indian
[Guest]: Express intern. I was, my friend and two of the other friends got in, I didn't, they were
[Guest]: more sad than I was happy that they had got in. And then, like the story that I've told
[Guest]: in a lot of places is that my friend's mother saw this ad in midday for a sports reporter,
[Guest]: which has never appeared before or since ever in that time. I said, why don't you apply,
[Guest]: you have done all these interviews, you got on, you got pylons in the afternoon newspaper,
[Guest]: apply, apply. So I applied. And from that day on, that's all that I've done in the sense
[Guest]: of being a sports journalist. And I take great pride in the fact that I worked for midday.
[Guest]: They've just broken a big story today also, so I'm damn happy.
[Guest]: What story have they broken today?
[Guest]: About how at Mumbai, at Sahara airport, they're just not Sahara, whatever the new airport
[Guest]: is, they're trying, they're letting international arrivals escape through without going through
[Guest]: quarantine. They've basically got recordings, they've just basically like blown everything
[Guest]: out of the water. Good for midday.
[Amit Varma]: Awesome. So tell me about those midday years, because it strikes me that that's also an
[Amit Varma]: interesting place to work in the sense that it's different from the others. One in that
[Amit Varma]: age, of course, you have midday and afternoon competing with each other. And there is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, pressure on midday that make yourself stand out and the headline has to be like
[Amit Varma]: this and your strap has to be a tailor and all that. So one there is that aspect where
[Amit Varma]: you have to sort of enhance the dramatic as it were, which in any case, you know, is something
[Amit Varma]: that happens in sport. And the other aspect, of course, is that your newspaper is coming
[Amit Varma]: out later in the day. It's not their first thing in the morning. So everybody's already
[Amit Varma]: kind of gotten the match report and what has happened and all of that. So how did all of
[Amit Varma]: that kind of shape the sort of work that you had to do?
[Guest]: Midday was a great place to work because it had, of course, it had this sort of, you know,
[Guest]: cutting edge screaming page three photographs. I don't know if you remember the page three
[Guest]: photograph. The page three photograph was supposed to replicate the UK tabloid model
[Guest]: of the page three photograph, which is a topless. But of course, you cannot have topless in
[Guest]: India. So you had one glamorous photo of a woman. I remember that. I mean, you're just
[Guest]: looking at it and saying, what is this and all that anyway. But this was also the age,
[Guest]: Amit, I don't know whether you remember that in, not that you would have gone through women's
[Guest]: magazines, Eves Weekly or Femina or something. They used to have a section that says send
[Guest]: us an advertisement or a piece of writing or this thing that is sexist and anti-women.
[Guest]: And there used to be clippings of it and they used to like call out the advertiser or call
[Guest]: out the publication or whatever. It used to run like, it was seriously done. And when
[Guest]: you look at it now and you just see what's happening all over the paper, oh my God, what
[Guest]: the, so obviously that was like the first say 10, 15, 20 years of the women's movement
[Guest]: in India. And it was a very, very important issue. And the topics that were talked about
[Guest]: in those magazines were very serious and dowry, deaths and everything and all the laws. And
[Guest]: I remember reading all of that stuff. Anyway, then we go into this midday, which is irreverent
[Guest]: as hell. And you had these things of headlines and you had to sell. And sport was actually
[Guest]: seen as their big, almost one of their, they had to be the strongest departments, but they
[Guest]: had only one person in it. Sunil Warrior, who then quit and joined Times of India. And
[Guest]: then there was me that joined in. But the wonderful thing about the place was that it
[Guest]: was as democratic as you can imagine. You know, it wasn't, there wasn't a formal structure.
[Guest]: You were just thrown to the dogs, dogs, I mean, whatever. You were just thrown into
[Guest]: the deep end, not dogs, sorry. And you had to just sort of learn on the job, virtually.
[Guest]: You learned on the job when it came to you doing an interview, getting a phone number,
[Guest]: how do you do this? How do you do that? And even with the way that you presented your
[Guest]: report, what you talked about, and you were told this all the time, that the morning,
[Guest]: don't tell me what happened, tell me something else away from what happened. And that became
[Guest]: great training, because it then gave you a chance to sort of step back from the mundane
[Guest]: part of what could be mundane. But it was always more difficult. So everyone is sitting
[Guest]: down when the game is over. And if you had typewriters, you'd be typing or you'd be just
[Guest]: chatting and you had to go around then and try and talk to somebody, try and find something
[Guest]: else, do something. So it gave you a way to sort of think differently and work a little
[Guest]: bit differently away from what was the convention at the time, which helped much later on, because
[Guest]: there I worked four years at Midday and Prem, with whom you had spoken at that time, also
[Guest]: joined Midday. And we had just a complete mania. I remember, like complete craziness,
[Guest]: because I was just talking to him the other day. And I remember I did a profile in a section
[Guest]: on Sunday Midday, which is called Off Track, which is like an unusual subject. It's like
[Guest]: a feature Sunday piece on a horse. That was a favorite to win the Derby. And so Prem said,
[Guest]: yeah, it was supposed to be like Seabiscuit. I said, you never said to me anything like
[Guest]: Seabiscuit. You just told me go and write a profile of the horse. I was just going to
[Guest]: go and profile the horse, Starfire Girl. So I had written a profile. When I looked at
[Guest]: it, I have all my clippings. So whatever people say about not sort of trying to be in the
[Guest]: background and making sure you don't get noticed, I have kept all my clippings. I have all my
[Guest]: stories from India today on PDF files saved and kept. I'm like this thing. I made sure
[Guest]: I had pictures taken of me at various places, which I wanted, you know, in that sense, before
[Guest]: the selfie and the camera, because I want to remember what I was able to do, not as
[Guest]: a way of, oh, look at me, this is what I did. But this is that experience that I had. And
[Guest]: I want to remember that in a photograph. So it's not. So when people ask me, do you have
[Guest]: photographs of your time? I said, yes, lots. So but I do, I do keep, I do. I do want to
[Guest]: have that memory of the great things that I was able to experience and work in and write
[Guest]: about and so on. So the midday experience when Nikhil Lakshman came in particularly
[Guest]: was to tell us how to look at things differently, how to look at a sports event away from its
[Guest]: conventional sort of side and how do you interview people and what do you do it. And we got sent
[Guest]: to do absolutely mad things like this profile of a horse. And I remember I did a profile
[Guest]: of MAM Ramaswamy. He was like such a foreboding and such a formidable kind of a person. I
[Guest]: said, why have I been sent to interview him? I was just terrified that I would get it completely
[Guest]: wrong. But you went there and you did it, you know. And because it was almost like a
[Guest]: very anti-judgmental place as well. You felt completely at home. So whatever else happened
[Guest]: in the outside world, you came into an office environment that was very secure, where there
[Guest]: were a lot of women around. One of the women was in charge of the desk. She was one of
[Guest]: the chief subs. The crime reporter was female. The civic reporter was female. So it was no
[Guest]: big deal that we were female sports reporters at the time. Me and then the others, Hemal
[Guest]: joined. Hemal, Anusha, Prajwal, you know, it was not odd at all for us to be there.
[Guest]: What people looked at it from the outside didn't matter because midday in the sense
[Guest]: was our home and we felt comfortable. We felt sort of secure. So we were just glad to be
[Guest]: there. And that gave you a lot of confidence going ahead, you know, in whatever else you
[Guest]: did. They sent me to Wimbledon. They sent me to Sharjah to cover this one of those Coca-Cola
[Guest]: type tournaments. But that was the time the South Africa were readmitted into international
[Guest]: cricket. And Kuldeep Lal from AFP and I went to meet Makaduj and Dakin who landed in Dubai
[Guest]: and got some quotes of them and etc. And because it was a morning paper, you could file the
[Guest]: story and your exclusive was page one. It was there. You had spoken to them. You went
[Guest]: at two o'clock, you filed the story at five or six o'clock in the morning and it was published
[Guest]: in midday. So it was that as well. It helped you. You had that advantage of time in the
[Guest]: sense that if you, ideally it helped for say test matches in England or football that was
[Guest]: not covered that much as it is now. It was not a part of like a newspaper space as it
[Guest]: is now. But cricket certainly was. And the Grand Slams. So Wimbledon, when I was sent
[Guest]: to Wimbledon, I had to make sure I did the last matches of that day. So when Jim Courier
[Guest]: lost, I covered that match. You know, that was the story that you got. So you got the
[Guest]: last match of the Centre Court or Cote d'Ivoire or whatever. So it was a good experience because
[Guest]: in a way, sometimes you will be tired that you are trying to find this new angle all
[Guest]: the time. But at the same time, when you look back and think it was just a, it was a great
[Guest]: learning and it was such a good atmosphere to work in, that you never felt judged or
[Guest]: slighted or whatever. It was like you were part of this whole team and everybody was
[Guest]: on your side. And Prem and I were remembering Tariq Ansari, who was in charge at the time.
[Guest]: I'm thinking about what a cool boss he was. Because we could say anything. We could be
[Guest]: shouting and say, go away. We can't hear. We'll be screaming on the phone. You're not
[Guest]: giving us ads. It was complete pandemonium. And the press was running parallel to, you
[Guest]: know, there was a plywood partition separating the editorial office and the actual printing
[Guest]: machine. So you could hear the printing machine rattling and the floor shaking as the paper
[Guest]: was being printed. And I remember Tariq Ansari sending me a message. Dubai Sharjah was my
[Guest]: first tour. And I came back, I finished it was the last day. Next morning, I was going
[Guest]: to fly. They said, there's a message for you. Telex message. And it was from Tariq Ansari.
[Guest]: And he said, you have done so well for us. We are so proud of you. Congratulations. I
[Guest]: mean, who gets that from their management person? You know, he was like the, he was
[Guest]: the CEO or whatever he was of the paper. He sent this to a junior who was just, who's
[Guest]: on her first tour. So you really felt loved in that organization. You felt appreciated.
[Guest]: You know, I believe it's changed completely. It's become a different kind of a paper, but
[Guest]: it was a great, great place to work. I was really, really fortunate.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm, I'm struck by a bunch of things. Let me first sort of ask you about the craft.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember when I look back on myself as a young sports writer, I just cringe at
[Amit Varma]: the kind of stuff I would write. Because as a, as a, no, don't laugh. It's like that with
[Amit Varma]: everyone.
[Guest]: No, no, because we all laugh at what rubbish we used to write.
[Amit Varma]: What rubbish we used to write.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not laughing at you. I'm laughing with you.
[Amit Varma]: It's a shared moment like Max Piazzi.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Guest]: Yeah. So
[Guest]: Bless you, Max. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I think one of the fundamental reasons that happens is that you're young, you're
[Amit Varma]: just kind of falling in love with the language and writing and all of that. You want to show
[Amit Varma]: off how good you are, you know, and you really become a good writer when you strip the ego
[Amit Varma]: away. And that's something that you learn over time. And of course, the ego is still
[Amit Varma]: there, because you want to do a great story, but you manage to sort of not keep showing
[Amit Varma]: off. I mean, I remember in my early days in Wisden and Crickenfur, it was just embarrassing.
[Amit Varma]: And luckily, you know, Sambit, our former mutual colleague was just such a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: editor in terms of, you know, just letting it play out, because he would have known that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, I have all these young people who do all these interesting things, but they will
[Amit Varma]: grow out of it eventually. So, and while you were sort of describing the hectic routine
[Amit Varma]: at midday, where you're all the time going out and doing stories. And by the way, I spoke
[Amit Varma]: to Prem before we had this conversation. And he told me this lovely story of how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one week it was decided that let's do a horse racing special. And you did this massive two
[Amit Varma]: page spread on Paisley Shroff, which got Paisley Shroff into trouble because he was so candid.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, he just like went for it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, almost like he's on the
[Amit Varma]: scene and the unseen that's up, no filter and got into trouble. And Prem was raving
[Amit Varma]: about this graphic that you did. And this is early 90s, perhaps about this graphic where
[Amit Varma]: you've got a graphic of a race course. And at different points in that you have arrows,
[Amit Varma]: where you're describing, you know, you interviewed a trainer and you're describing exactly what
[Amit Varma]: the strategy is at that particular point of the race and where all of that is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought that's just fantastic. But, you know, leaving that kind of aside, and
[Amit Varma]: if you have the PDF, actually, you know, all the stories that we are mentioning in this,
[Amit Varma]: if you have the PDF, send them to me, I'll just, if you don't mind, I'll upload them.
[Guest]: So our listeners can...
[Amit Varma]: Oh, the midday ones?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, whatever.
[Guest]: Midday I have actually clippings, I have like paper cuttings. I don't have a PDF of the
[Guest]: India Today story.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely, lovely. Anyway, so to sort of ramble back to the question, because this is not
[Amit Varma]: like a horse racing track where you can't go sideways and around and into the stands
[Amit Varma]: and then come back. Do you think that having to do stories every day, you know, having
[Amit Varma]: to all the time produce, produce, produce, do you think that actually helped your writing
[Amit Varma]: a lot? Because then that means you have less time to get self conscious, less time to sort
[Amit Varma]: of kind of work on the craft, you just have to produce, produce, produce, you keep doing
[Amit Varma]: that. And obviously, that constant iteration just makes you better at what you do. And
[Amit Varma]: also that practice of the gaze, that because you're in the middle, you can't cover what
[Amit Varma]: everyone else does. So your gaze is different. You know, did all of that help you? And take
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit through your thinking of how your craft evolved.
[Guest]: Interesting what you say, I never even thought of it. I don't think of it as a craft in that
[Guest]: sense. Maybe it's just sort of a reflex of not trying to be too self kind of navel gazing
[Guest]: all the time. What you're saying about the fact that you're doing content and you're
[Guest]: producing, producing, producing is maybe it helps you because you just, you have to just
[Guest]: shut yourself out and just do the job. We used to have a section every day, it had to
[Guest]: be a single column photograph and of the previous day's spot and it to have a clever caption
[Guest]: with it, you know, just to sort of very midday type. And it used to be just death trying
[Guest]: to think of things every day. And I remember when I used to come from the hostel in Colaba,
[Guest]: all the way, you've caught the bus at five o'clock in the morning, because you have to
[Guest]: go on the, that's when your shift starts, basically around six, you're in office in
[Guest]: the morning. And I'm trying to think it was called sports, I've forgotten the name. It
[Guest]: used to just be in your head that you have to think of something and all the time you're
[Guest]: doing it and then you have to just regurgitate it. And eventually what happened is that the
[Guest]: chief sub would just tweak it a little bit and it would be perfect, whatever that little
[Guest]: picture was. So it became practice. It became also a little bit of almost understanding
[Guest]: as to how you frame the story, because at that time you had to print galleys on a page
[Guest]: and every time that your story was too long, it was very simple. We used to say, piche
[Guest]: se kato, the bottom most lines would just get cut off. So it didn't matter how you had
[Guest]: formed the phrase, what you had done, what was structured. They didn't care. They just
[Guest]: cut it off from the bottom. If you wanted to save your last line, then you have to cut
[Guest]: three, four lines uparse and find that. So it was almost like a, it was like fitting
[Guest]: things into a box. So you became very, very pragmatic about it. Of course, that doesn't
[Guest]: mean you got very antsy when your copy was cut. Even 25 years later, you get very agitated
[Guest]: and you say, what is this? This is like proper prose and you're turning, you have no appreciation
[Guest]: of art. But still, it just became very, very practical that you had to remember what was
[Guest]: superfluous had to be put right at the bottom, virtually. And what is important had to be
[Guest]: put on the top of the thing. And the other good thing that worked for me, I mean, Hindu
[Guest]: of course, Hindu was another, so I had various different experiences when it came to writing
[Guest]: midday Hindu, India Today, and then Crick Info, is that the requirements and the demands
[Guest]: are different. So you learned how to adjust as to how you wrote. In Hindu, I used to pull
[Guest]: off this little, I thought it was a big trick, that I knew after the first day, I would know
[Guest]: what kind of the sub-editor was on duty at night, who was a guy who was good. So you
[Guest]: knew if you could slip in a few phrases, have a little bit of fun with language, say something
[Guest]: cheeky. If that was a week to do it, if there was a guy on desk who would laugh and appreciate
[Guest]: it, then you just went for it. You didn't do too much, but you just put enough little
[Guest]: bits of what you thought were gems or what you thought they were gems, who remembers,
[Guest]: and you get away with it. And one week, there would be someone who had no time for all this,
[Guest]: just give us the facts. Forget all your stylishness and all that, the hell with you, give us the
[Guest]: facts. So then you made sure you just gave them the facts. And then when I joined India
[Guest]: Today, I was told, I don't know who told this to me, I think it was Rohit Brijnath, if I'm
[Guest]: not wrong. One of the India Today people told me, he said, do what you want for the first
[Guest]: two paragraphs. In the third paragraph, in 25 words, tell us what the story is about.
[Guest]: You want to do drama in the first two paragraphs, you want to talk about birds, skies, clouds,
[Guest]: do it. By the third paragraph, we have to know what the story is. And it doesn't mean
[Guest]: that your first two paragraphs are 300 words each. Your first two paragraphs have to be
[Guest]: short, because again, you're dealing with a specific small amount of space and page
[Guest]: and so on. So it was fun learning it in that sense. And you also learned about how to be,
[Guest]: which of course went completely out of the window in Crick Info, because it's the internet,
[Guest]: you can publish as much as you want. So it's being disciplined with your language. And
[Guest]: I remember doing this in India Today that I would just be so, I was really tense all
[Guest]: the time, because it was a new job, and I'd moved to Delhi and everything. And I would
[Guest]: be writing. And at the end of it, I felt like I'd written nothing, because I had got so
[Guest]: much information, and you use 30% of it in the story. And I am so bad, I have to tell
[Guest]: you this, that in one of my email, I have a folder of unedited stories, of all the unedited
[Guest]: stories that I sent to India Today, which they then turned into what is a fairly readable
[Guest]: thing eventually at the end, they had a very, very good desk. They had a superb desk in
[Guest]: India Today, who knew exactly how to keep the essence of your fun or your style or whatever
[Guest]: your voice, so to speak. But all the bullshit they would just cut out, you know, all that
[Guest]: nonsense flippidness and all, they would just throw it out of the window. And those people
[Guest]: at the desk are still my friends. I am in a WhatsApp group with them. They were so,
[Guest]: they were so, so qualified and so adept at their work and so good at it that each of
[Guest]: them, I used to tell them, they could have run the midday news desk page, each of them
[Guest]: could have run that newspaper, really, I headed the desk in the paper, there was such good,
[Guest]: such high quality people on the desk over there. But I kept my unedited stories, I should
[Amit Varma]: be able to read them later. You know what you sound like? You sound like Sachin Tendulkar
[Amit Varma]: talking about all the runs he could have made. Now that you said it. You are the Sachin Tendulkar
[Guest]: of Indian sports writing. We've put you in your place. Yeah, exactly. No, no, no. I had
[Guest]: this other crazy thing. So at one time, some interview I was doing at Tendulkar, I interviewed
[Guest]: him after 10 years. And literally, that was like, it was great, because all 10 years,
[Guest]: I interviewed him. Because he had become a, when I was in the Hindu, I mostly did first
[Guest]: class cricket, and I did volleyball and table tennis and everything. And I barely did very
[Guest]: little Indian cricket. And so from 1993 to 2003, I had never spoken to him in this thing.
[Guest]: But in 2003, he gave me a fabulous interview, fabulous. Yeah. And in which he basically
[Guest]: said like all competitors, I only will lose to my children, nobody else. I can only bear
[Guest]: losing to my children, but not anybody else. So it's that is the same competitiveness kind
[Guest]: of thing that is that is there, among a lot of other things at the time. So anyhow, yeah,
[Guest]: so where was I? Yeah, so I had this unedited story. It's still there. I should read it.
[Guest]: I'll probably I'll vomit when I look at those stories now when I look at it, but that file
[Guest]: is still there. So I did a story on the Formula One guy and Naren Karthikeyan and whatever
[Guest]: and I kept all that all that material. Then in Crick Info, my problem was with speed.
[Guest]: I couldn't write fast enough. You know, I used to take five hours to write a story.
[Guest]: Then in the time that I finished, as in five hours, not a match report, match report was
[Guest]: done. No, even match report would take that much time. Then it was down to two hours.
[Guest]: So I was all right. I was within the acceptable boundaries of Crick Info turnaround time.
[Guest]: But five hours was too bad. I remember Andrew McClatchy in London, in the news desk, in
[Guest]: the 2011 World Cup, I was sitting and writing my story on Tendulkar and Strauss's two innings
[Guest]: at that tied game. And Nasher was sitting there, it's 12 o'clock in the night. And I
[Guest]: said, Nasher, I'm just filing. He said, yeah, take your time. In this very Crick Info, relaxed.
[Guest]: Okay, I'm here to take nonsense. Just do it. Send it. So it took me that much time. It
[Guest]: was midnight, it was five o'clock in the morning. And I used to send the story out. So it was
[Guest]: great in the sense that you had because you had so you had such a range, different type
[Guest]: of writing that you had to do, that you were able to say you had to adapt and keep moving
[Guest]: and keep switching it around and sort of being flexible in what you wrote. And when it came
[Guest]: to sort of saying finding your voice or whatever, then you sort of discover much later on in
[Guest]: the in the piece, you kind of really say, okay, this is what I really want to say. I've
[Guest]: spent 20 years of my life doing this. Now, in the last 10 or five or whatever, this is
[Guest]: what I have to say, this is what I think is important. And you learn those things as you
[Guest]: go on. Or in your mind, you discover to say what you really want to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think you're being harsh on yourself. It's not just a five or 10 years. I remember
[Amit Varma]: reading you from the late 90s. And you were always just fantastic. A question sort of
[Amit Varma]: taking off from something that you just said, like first and aside, like you mentioned the
[Amit Varma]: tabloids how they would snip from the bottom. Yeah, in the third of my webinars that I do
[Amit Varma]: in my writing course, I talk about six different forms of writing. And the first of them is
[Amit Varma]: the tabloid form, or even news agencies also follow that, you know, your single sentence
[Amit Varma]: paras and all that. And it's called a string of sausages, because you can cut it from the
[Amit Varma]: bottom. So that's literally what it's Yeah, and and it's very functional. If I was a tabloid
[Amit Varma]: editor, that's also what I would demand of my writers. So I can't write like that or
[Amit Varma]: read like that. But it's a function of the form. And of course, the last of my six forms
[Amit Varma]: is a literary novel. So we kind of look at the imperatives of different forms. Now, my
[Amit Varma]: question there is, and while you were talking, it also struck me that you've actually also
[Amit Varma]: worked in all these different forms, where, you know, like I put up an essay, which I
[Amit Varma]: linked from the show notes talking about how, firstly, form can shape your content, and
[Amit Varma]: then it can also shape who you are. Because you're, you know, your content shapes that
[Amit Varma]: for example, if you are doing say, five minute interviews, you don't really have to go too
[Amit Varma]: deep, you can ask one or two surface questions. If you're talking to an author, you don't
[Amit Varma]: even have to read the book. If you're doing a three hour interview, you've got to read
[Amit Varma]: 30 books, and you've got to kind of not just that one thing. And so the form forces you
[Amit Varma]: to go deeper, shapes the content, and because you're going deeper, it then shapes the writer
[Amit Varma]: as well, it shapes what you're looking at, like you spoke at midday, how one of the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: is find something different. So you're looking deeper, you're looking at different things,
[Amit Varma]: you're looking at the human stories, you're going and meeting Kamli's parents. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, all of that is happening. When you think about all the forms that you worked in, like
[Amit Varma]: you've done your tabloid thing in midday, but it's a tabloid thing with a difference,
[Amit Varma]: because whereas the form doesn't seem to allow for much creativity, the form seems to demand
[Amit Varma]: a certain kind of function, just give the information, the fact that the space that
[Amit Varma]: you're in, you're competing, there's a certain kind of journalism you're doing, you're looking
[Amit Varma]: for something that is sensational, even sensational, even noisy. You use those words, not me. So
[Amit Varma]: that works in interesting ways that shapes the content and the kind of thinking you do
[Amit Varma]: in interesting ways. You know, India today would have had a similar sort of effect, like
[Amit Varma]: you said, you can completely spread out, there are no sort of limits in terms of how much
[Amit Varma]: space you have and all of that. So, you know, one, how important is the form to shaping
[Amit Varma]: what a writer does and how they look? Because it strikes me that if you weren't in midday,
[Amit Varma]: let's say you get through the Indian Express internship or whatever, you know, you're doing
[Amit Varma]: a different kind of writing, do you then go in a different kind of direction? And I know
[Amit Varma]: you can't obviously sit and think of counterfactuals about yourself. But it's it's all these kind
[Amit Varma]: of happy or unhappy accidents make us who we are. So what do you think of that? What
[Amit Varma]: do you think of form? And what do you think about, like, you know, so many young talented
[Amit Varma]: cricket writers I read today as well. And you know, who are getting to spread out in
[Amit Varma]: places like Crickinfo and who are even doing things on YouTube or whatever. I mean, in
[Amit Varma]: terms of form, there is so much open to you. How have you seen that sort of evolving? Like
[Amit Varma]: there was a conventional cricket writer like I remember when I came into cricket writing
[Amit Varma]: and there were a bunch of young writers at that time, you know, Rahul Bhattacharya and
[Amit Varma]: so on and we'd go to all the press boxes and I'd feel this resentment towards me and one
[Amit Varma]: day one veteran writer from the Hindu told me that listen, I had to cover the local Ranji
[Amit Varma]: matches for 15 years before they let me anywhere near a test match. And you young whippersnapper
[Amit Varma]: have just come and you're like covering international matches and all of that. And how has that
[Amit Varma]: kind of landscape changed? And how does it then change the kind of writing that people
[Guest]: do? I think it's changed completely, you know, what they do, reporters tell you that I got
[Guest]: so much time and all that. I mean, I would think that, you know, I could sort of crib
[Guest]: the same in the sense, but not in midday because midday just threw you everywhere. You wanted
[Guest]: to do a test match, you went and did a test match, that kind of. So again, had I gone
[Guest]: to Indian Express, I heard my friends were there, I heard stories about the desk and
[Guest]: how it was a very formal sort of a kind of an environment. My friend didn't want to be
[Guest]: on the desk, she wanted to be a reporter. So she had to leave the desk, whereas she
[Guest]: was very good with language. And she then had to go and fight for this sort of space
[Guest]: and fight to do night shifts. And you're thinking of all these things and say, my God, I was
[Guest]: lucky and what was the cribbing about that I had to do something else and I just couldn't
[Guest]: sit and write one boring report of, you know, 300 words and so on. That played a big part.
[Guest]: I mean, Prajwal was also from midday and we both say the same thing, that that was such
[Guest]: good discipline for us because it really, when the entire structure of what a sports
[Guest]: page should look like shifted, we were ready for it because we'd done this in our very,
[Guest]: very early days. You know, we were absolutely fine and we knew how it was done because we
[Guest]: had the drill. Like you said, the gaze was already there to try and see the thing, which
[Guest]: now it is very simple that I tell any younger reporter going out to work, I said, try and
[Guest]: tell people what they won't see on television. You know, try and find those things in your
[Guest]: story. So look for those things. Don't just get sort of swept up in the whole sort of
[Guest]: thing. What has happened, I think, when Crick Info has completely changed the genre virtually
[Guest]: because of the fact that it had the space and it had these young writers coming through
[Guest]: and giving them time, space, opportunity. You know, for so many young sports journalists,
[Guest]: opportunities took such a long time coming. What you did in the time when you waited is
[Guest]: either you got fed up and you stopped paying attention to what you're doing or you just
[Guest]: took enjoyment out of what you were doing. So I remember in The Hindu, I used to go and
[Guest]: cover all these first class matches and everything, but I loved it. I just enjoyed it because
[Guest]: I was able to be at another place and see a game. I mean, the whole thing. My favorite
[Guest]: story is being a sailing reporter for The Hindu. Nobody cared about sailing except us.
[Guest]: Me, Sunil Warrior and Anand Vekadraman. We were the only ones who were interested in
[Guest]: sailing. So we would go and spend afternoons, weeks we would spend on the afternoon on a
[Guest]: boat outside the naval sailing club, talking to sailors, finding about the course and what
[Guest]: the wind was like and when did you tack and what was the... So you did that. So because
[Guest]: you enjoyed it, it was fine. It didn't bother you. If you didn't like it, then you could
[Guest]: get really sort of frustrated and bitter and angry and sort of point out to people that
[Guest]: I waited 25 years to go to a test match. The other thing that I'm looking at, maybe it
[Guest]: is, I don't know how it will play out when what happens with is whether doing too much
[Guest]: of this, you know, too much of this early is then makes you jaded from what you're doing.
[Guest]: And you need to kind of dial down and go back to say, then let me go back and cover first
[Guest]: class cricket. There's much more to be gleaned out of it. There's much more to be got out
[Guest]: of it. So you're just working the process in sort of reverse. And remember that in the
[Guest]: times that even when you are covering test cricket or Rahul was or Sid V was or whoever,
[Guest]: at that time, the entire environment around the Indian team was different. You know, I
[Guest]: remember we used to crave for having a media manager, see Australians have got media manager.
[Guest]: Now I think media manager is like a disaster because you don't get people to say things
[Guest]: they really mean, you know, are you just getting formulaic responses to things. So you're looking
[Guest]: at young cricket writers now and saying, you know, listen, guys do as much first class
[Guest]: cricket as you can because this is like, it's not fun. We don't have to be going to these
[Guest]: games to write what we want to write about it. Because it's on television, it's online,
[Guest]: we can decipher it, we can whatever it and now because of COVID, they're not even letting
[Guest]: you in, you know, so go and do the small stuff, which is where there is a lot of fun. And
[Guest]: there's a lot of colour and quality and you'll get to know. I was chatting to a couple of
[Guest]: my younger colleagues yesterday, they told me great stories about covering matches, Gujarat
[Guest]: versus Jharkhand, some final or this thing match or great stuff, you know. So I think
[Guest]: the form does change in a way. And the best thing as a journalist, if you're a young journalist
[Guest]: can be is that you make yourself as adaptable, almost like it's almost like all three formats,
[Guest]: you know, it's like that you have to try and adjust to all the three formats that you have
[Guest]: to play the really long piece, which is where the author and the creative writer and the
[Guest]: reader and you might emerge, then the sort of middling 800 word piece and then the little
[Guest]: stuff you've got to push out quickly. So try and do that because it'll just keep your mind
[Guest]: fresh in that sense. So at this point in time, I'm writing pieces for Hindustan Times. So
[Guest]: I have to write about say 1100-1200 words in a particular way. Then I have to write
[Guest]: a piece on Ganguly for a night watchman, hopefully it'll get written, which will be a 2000 word
[Guest]: piece will be slightly longer. I also did some video thing for somebody for a little
[Guest]: short period of time that you give out your video response, Google cameos or whatever.
[Guest]: That was a beta test for about two minutes on video. It is so tough to do that because
[Guest]: all the time your brain is like in all 25 places at the same time and you have to say
[Guest]: something creative and funny in a single quotient sentence and whatever and on camera. And so
[Guest]: it's these three that sort of it asks you to sort of adjust to the various formats that
[Guest]: are there. And the more adaptable you are, the more fun it is there. You know, you can
[Guest]: write in different voices. I know it sounds like a sort of psycho, but you can write in
[Guest]: different voices. You can write in different tones, because you can't respond to sport
[Guest]: in just one way all the time. You know, you have to look at it at all the levels that
[Guest]: it exists and what you look at it and what you make of it, I suppose.
[Amit Varma]: No one I think, you know, if I was a young writer today, I'd probably find more enjoyment
[Amit Varma]: going to smaller games and first class games and all of that. And the big test matches
[Amit Varma]: because a big test matches are saturated, done to death, and you have no access. So
[Amit Varma]: at a practical level, you can build access to future stars by covering them today and
[Amit Varma]: becoming friends today. But at a deeper level, at the level in which it helps your writing,
[Amit Varma]: you will just find more human stories and deeper stories if you actually go and cover
[Amit Varma]: the smaller games. And to me, that's much more exciting. You mentioned sailing. So tell
[Amit Varma]: me something. Is our journalism shrinking in a way that a sailing reporter isn't possible
[Guest]: today? I don't think so at all. I went to Goa. Everyone says, what's your favorite assignment?
[Guest]: So of course, I've had much, I've been to Olympics and everything, you know, but I went
[Guest]: to Goa to cover the World Enterprise Championships, might have been 1994, after I joined the Hindu.
[Guest]: In Goa for, I think it was about 10 days. And we were just covering sailing for 10 days.
[Guest]: It was a world, it's a particular class that's only sailed in the Commonwealth. So it sailed
[Guest]: in Pakistan, and it sailed in Australia and Britain and so on. Enterprise, I don't even
[Guest]: know if it exists anymore now. It's not an Olympic class of boat, but we were pretty
[Guest]: good at it at that time. And you knew all the sailors. And we spent 10 days in Goa.
[Guest]: And like I used to say, nobody in the Hindu Chennai cared what was happening. But I had
[Guest]: gone to cover the event. So I had to file 600 words, which I would file with my best
[Guest]: efforts and intentions trying to describe everything and the weather, the wind speed,
[Guest]: what the sailors were doing. And then in the evening, we would get onto a bus and literally
[Guest]: you went to work with a wallet, a notebook and a pen in your Bermudas cup pockets and
[Guest]: your chappals, you went to work. That was your office for 10 days. So I think the space
[Guest]: has shrunk so much that you don't even get coverage of things like national badminton,
[Guest]: tennis tournaments, we do so much of that. It's almost got European football as I think
[Guest]: elbowed out a lot of that saying that, oh, people don't want to read anything about these
[Guest]: wretched tennis players and sailors. So like a back of the queue almost, you know. And
[Guest]: it's very sad because I mean, I'm saying is very sad because I had fun. But still, it's
[Guest]: very sad because if you're a sports journalist, you want to see as many sports as you can
[Guest]: if you have an interest in that and find out things about how sports function, how people
[Guest]: think what happens, what are common patterns, what are uncommon patterns. And India had
[Guest]: a pretty good sailing sort of tradition in the 90s. We won medals at the Asian Games
[Guest]: level, which we now I think we've won a couple more recently. So it's those kind of things
[Guest]: that if you are interested in Olympic sport, you know, or non-cricket, then you have to
[Guest]: have a space to give all of them more mileage or all of them more almost bandwidth to say
[Guest]: that there is this kind of thing that is there. Because the cricket to other sports number
[Guest]: is about 10 times, you know, and it's very, very evident. You can see that when you write,
[Guest]: you can see that when you in if you're doing your checking data and things like that. It's
[Guest]: 10 times and it's not that there's no there's nothing to write about in those sports as
[Guest]: well.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, people who are in other sports, what kind of keeps them going? Because on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, you have cricket being the you know, the big sort of gorilla in the room
[Amit Varma]: as it were, no offense to gorillas. And this is gorilla, Sayan, Atul Bidadi are all now
[Guest]: falling into this category of people dissed in this vodcast. I'm feeling really bad now.
[Guest]: I know, really. No, no, nothing. Sayan is great. And Atul Bidadi was superb. Yeah, actually,
[Guest]: I was the person who told him that he got picked for India. I remember it was in CCI.
[Guest]: I said, Atul, you got picked. He said, did you know you're in the team? And he was like
[Guest]: completely zapped. You know, after this had happened. I forgot what the event was. I remember
[Guest]: telling him this. But this is the time when there was no Twitter, there is nothing.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, I interviewed him for something else. And I was passing him, I said, oh, you're
[Amit Varma]: in the team. He said, really? Yeah. You know, so it's quite likely that the happiest moment
[Guest]: of his life has your voice in it. So imagine that. Maybe I'm dreaming this up. But I remember
[Guest]: it so clearly. He was like, completely lit up completely. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you know,
[Amit Varma]: stories of his big hitting were legion. For those of my listeners who may not know Atul
[Amit Varma]: Bidadi was this insane six hitter in the late 90s. And he got picked for the 99 World Cup
[Amit Varma]: and didn't really do anything. I mean, he just just couldn't make an impact. But that
[Amit Varma]: could just be a question of opportunity or whatever. But in domestic cricket, he was
[Amit Varma]: a kind of hitter who I think even today at whatever the strike rate was then would have
[Amit Varma]: been an absolute beast. So to kind of get back to my question, and I'm having to look
[Amit Varma]: at my notes, because for a moment I forgot. But when you sort of look at these other sports
[Amit Varma]: people, I want to ask you about a couple of aspects of them. One is that just at a mentality
[Amit Varma]: level, what kind of keeps them going in a sport where there's really no money, there's
[Amit Varma]: only so long that you do something for the love of it, I guess part of what they want
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, whenever you're part of any small community, whether it's krabble
[Amit Varma]: players or chess players, or whatever your small community is, that community seems really
[Guest]: poker players, poker players, that community seems we have to discuss this still, we'll
[Guest]: have a reverse conversation. If you insist, we can have a conversation about this later.
[Amit Varma]: So that small community seems like a really big community to you. So obviously, it is
[Amit Varma]: enough of validation that within that community, you rise and you are still competitive. But
[Amit Varma]: over a larger period of time, it's a mess. Like I remember, I used to play competitive
[Amit Varma]: chess in my late teens are not very good, which is why I stopped in my late teens. But
[Amit Varma]: I remember once there were there were these inter university games, and I was representing
[Amit Varma]: Maharashtra. And I kind of went for that. And it was all sports. So you know, the four
[Amit Varma]: of us chess players were taken into this room, where you had 200 other people, everybody's
[Amit Varma]: on the sleeping on the floor, and the floor is kind of damp, and there's not enough space.
[Amit Varma]: And there's one set of three toilets for everybody in the morning. And obviously, we've got wrestlers
[Amit Varma]: and judokas and boxers and all that with us. So chess players are not really going to manage
[Amit Varma]: to make it to the front of the queue. And it is it is a mess. It is horrendous. And
[Amit Varma]: there are two aspects. One is you find you love your sport, but how the hell do you motivate
[Amit Varma]: yourself to keep going and keep doing it and all of that, because, you know, maybe a third
[Amit Varma]: aspect we can talk about is a way that is administered, which is also so pathetic. And
[Amit Varma]: the other sort of way of you know, the problem that they must face is that and this is especially
[Amit Varma]: true in the 70s, 80s, 90s, is that you don't have access to how the rest of the world is
[Amit Varma]: training. Like I remember I spoke to my good friend Devanshu Dutta, who was a competitive
[Amit Varma]: chess player in the 80s. And, you know, and he's a close friend of Vishwanathan Anand.
[Amit Varma]: And he at one point told me about his chess playing days, which were in the 80s, that
[Amit Varma]: the training was so far behind, that you would be talking about some problem with a Soviet
[Amit Varma]: player, which is incredibly difficult for you. And you would find that that is one of
[Amit Varma]: the basic fundamentals they were taught when they were like two years old or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in a column that I wrote about Vishwanathan Anand once, I said that effectively
[Amit Varma]: to understand his achievement, you have to understand he was driving a Maruti 800 in
[Amit Varma]: a Formula One race, which makes it so staggering. And he somehow managed to do that. But how
[Amit Varma]: would these sports people cope? How would they train? What are the kinds of jugaad they
[Amit Varma]: had to go through? Like in a recent interview, you spoke about the kinds of jugaad people
[Amit Varma]: have been doing in the last year over the pandemic, you know, where they'll set up an
[Amit Varma]: obstacle course in their living room or whatever and figure out ways. Give me a little sense
[Amit Varma]: of the life of the average non cricketing, Indian sports person, you know, through all
[Guest]: these years.
[Guest]: So you're looking at sort of basically two lots, you're looking at Olympic sports that
[Guest]: are there. I think that in a lot of the main what they call, there's a word they use for
[Guest]: it in the Sarkar, priority sports. In what are priority sports, there is a very, currently,
[Guest]: there's a very clear structure of how and a pathway, basically, of how things are done.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean administration is perfect. But it's much better than what it was in the
[Guest]: 80s and the 90s. And you remember this. So what you're telling the story about university
[Guest]: athletes is a similar story I heard about a woman cricketer talking about going to a
[Guest]: men's cricket event and being in this big shadika hall and the two teams being separated
[Guest]: by this one string of cloth or some wall or some kapda hanging between the two sides.
[Guest]: So that has changed considerably in the last, say, 20 odd years, maybe 15 years or so, because
[Guest]: there are, you know, the size centers are huge. There are just a lot of them there.
[Guest]: And so there'll be athletes, if you're picked for it, you get coached. And there is an understanding
[Guest]: that for every 100 athletes that you'll be working with, you'll get three or four that
[Guest]: will be of a higher quality and the younger athletes will go. I mean, I've heard stories.
[Guest]: Then so there's these Olympic sports and then there's football. And in football, you have
[Guest]: massive number of community sort of places that are there that are self run, like the
[Guest]: person in Bondapara, who I was telling you about, that do these things. And what the
[Guest]: athletes lack at this point in time, this is pet topic of mine, we could have separate
[Guest]: four hour podcast on this, is enough tournaments to play in. That is what Indian athletes lack
[Guest]: more than anything else. At the moment, what has happened is because of the internet and
[Guest]: cheap data availability on mobile phones, they are able to get access to the best quality
[Guest]: of training, coaching, advice, drills, all the rest of it. It's there on their hand.
[Guest]: So they train, they work hard, they want to do, they understand that there is a living
[Guest]: in sport to be made. Depends on the sport. If you are X level, you will get a job in
[Guest]: the railways. It's a pathway to a secure life if you're coming from there. Now, if you're
[Guest]: in football, there are these other multiple sort of various levels at which you have.
[Guest]: It's not as organized as it could be. It's not as sort of well spread out or evenly worked
[Guest]: out as it could be. It's not equitable in any case. In some places, it's much better.
[Guest]: In some places, it's worse. But always at every level, you're finding out there's not
[Guest]: enough competitions taking place. It's not that there's not enough talent. And at this
[Guest]: point, so there's not enough opportunity. That is what is lacking with the people. So
[Guest]: the people that are competing, and then you've got this amazing, for the first time, you've
[Guest]: got this very incredible center, privately funded, Inspire Institute of Sports by the
[Guest]: JSW group set up just outside the plant in Vijayanagar. And their thought process is
[Guest]: very, very clear. It's got four combat sports. It's got jumps and athletics, runs, sprints,
[Guest]: basically, and it's got swimming. So they're not spreading themselves too thin. They're
[Guest]: just doing very basic things so that you don't need too much of infrastructure, right? Swimming,
[Guest]: running, combat sports, it is you versus another person. And that's it. So there's all this
[Guest]: that's there. And I remember an official in Guwahati in Sai telling me that we can train
[Guest]: all these athletes. Guwahati has this incredible Sai center in the middle. Like imagine a Sai
[Guest]: center in the middle of, I'm going to say Saiyan again, but I'll just get killed by
[Guest]: people in Sai. You've already said Saiyan. I've already said Saiyan. No, no, imagine
[Guest]: it sort of in the middle of, I'm trying to think what's the most crowded place in Bombay
[Amit Varma]: you can think of? The most crowded? Dharavi? I don't know. Dharavi? The Virar Fast? No,
[Amit Varma]: no, that is the train. You should have a camp in a train though. You should have a sporting
[Guest]: camp in the Virar Fast. Wrestling, wrestling, yeah. So imagine sort of say in the middle
[Guest]: of Cheera Bazaar. In the middle of Cheera Bazaar is this huge athletic sports facility
[Guest]: that has a full-size football field, a full-size indoor hall, and they produce these players
[Guest]: from there. So this is called Paltan Bazaar in Guwahati. And that guy said, you know,
[Guest]: we can produce all the athletes you want. We'll do all the things, they'll do the drills,
[Guest]: they'll go through these particular programs that they have to, but then you have to, they
[Guest]: have to have events to take part in. You can't have them only taking part in three, two national
[Guest]: tournaments in a year. You need for them to compete all the time. Our people that are
[Guest]: rowing, so one of the rowing coaches from overseas who had worked with the Olympic rowers,
[Guest]: he said, my son is under 16. This year when he goes into X particular regatta, he would have
[Guest]: competed in 25 regattas before, before the, around the time he's 16, 17 years old. He said,
[Guest]: I don't know a single rower in India who would have competed in 25 regattas. Now, okay, rowing
[Guest]: is an expensive sport or whatever, but you're investing money into it, give them events to
[Guest]: compete in. So that to my mind is the big, the next sort of step, the next push that you have
[Guest]: to make is to get people to have enough events to compete in. You know, there is talent, there is no
[Guest]: opportunity. That's the, that's, that's what it is. There's not enough opportunity. There is,
[Guest]: but there's not enough opportunity. Which is what, but what keeps them going? I mean, I'm,
[Guest]: I'm always astonished at, despite everything. Again, in the conversation I was having with
[Guest]: Prajwal and Manuja yesterday, we were talking about the things that you see in people, like
[Guest]: the bent ears of the wrestlers, or you look at, I saw this Dattu Bokanal's hands, he was a rower.
[Guest]: You can see that our gymnasts are competing with injuries because that's what they do all the time.
[Guest]: And I can't understand what, there is just a sense of almost boundless optimism in them.
[Guest]: It's very hard to beat that out of them. That boundless optimism to just be competing and to
[Guest]: just say, just give me a chance and I'll show you what I can do. It's almost in a way, it's like you
[Guest]: want to cry when you hear about it, you know. But they just have it. At every level, they seem to
[Guest]: have it. And their optimism and their energy doesn't get beaten out of them as easily as it
[Guest]: would get beaten out of maybe, I don't know, you and me, you know. It's, it's just the most,
[Guest]: I can't describe it. You know, if you're thinking of all the qualities that you find in athletes,
[Guest]: competitiveness, but this, this thing, what it is, I don't know. They may be happy with what
[Guest]: they've got. They've got a decent livelihood. They're doing okay and all, but this whole thing
[Guest]: to keep going and not to not stop, that is, it's a very hard thing to, for you and me to grasp and
[Guest]: understand what it means, you know. It's, it's very difficult. Yeah. I think, I think somewhere
[Amit Varma]: else you mentioned how, you know, Deepak Karmakar, when she did the Pradhanova once, she did it with
[Guest]: a hairline fracture on her ankle. Yeah. Like what? Like how? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, and, and,
[Guest]: and it wasn't that she was pushed into doing it. She just wanted to do it. Yeah. And she has that
[Guest]: kind of streak in her. I mean, then you hear about the horrific stories about gymnasts and, and the
[Guest]: reason why gymnasts from USA and Romania won't try the Pradhanova because it's too dangerous.
[Guest]: But with athletes from our country, it's the only shot they have at anything, at anything that gives
[Guest]: them this thing. Whatever else we'll do, if we can nail this, you know, that's the thing. But the
[Guest]: whole thing that is dangerous is, you know, the whole thing about, oh, it's the death, the vault
[Guest]: of death. It's a vault of death if you don't practice it. If you and I try to do it, we will
[Guest]: die. You know, straight away, first try, we'll be dead. But they practice it enough, you know,
[Guest]: so that they're able to just nail it once they practice it. That's all that I'm saying. It is
[Guest]: the vault of death, but only for clueless clunks, not for competitive athletes, you know. No, and
[Amit Varma]: also, I guess to talk about it in poker terms, if you're behind, then you want to take a higher
[Amit Varma]: variance path. So other countries may not need to try the Pradhanova, but there is, there is a
[Amit Varma]: certain rationale to her saying that I'm not going to reach the top. Otherwise, I have to do this
[Amit Varma]: shit. And that's also very poignant and sad in a way, I guess, you know, and you've... One more
[Guest]: story in this, I'll just interrupt you here, is that had she not, had the sports authority and
[Guest]: the sports minister not pushed, she would not have gone to Rio to compete. Because there are
[Guest]: two gymnastic federations fighting with each other about who owns the gymnast, which is the official
[Guest]: one, which is not the official one. She would not have gone to Rio, if it had not been for her coach
[Guest]: being one completely stubborn person and reaching out and just basically breaking the door down and
[Guest]: saying, you have to send her, you have to send her to the test event in Rio, which she won, and then
[Guest]: she was, she qualified and everything. So that's the chance you're giving these people, yeah? What
[Amit Varma]: is this? So I'll ask you about the politics now, but before that, to complete the last question
[Amit Varma]: about sort of the jugaru ways in which people kind of, you know, get past all their kind of
[Amit Varma]: shortcomings. Like, I remember, I think Rahul Bhattacharya in the early 2000s wrote this story
[Amit Varma]: about Indian fast bowlers of the late 80s and early 90s. And he mentioned some fast bowler there,
[Amit Varma]: who somebody told him that, listen, you need stronger shoulders, why don't you try bowling
[Amit Varma]: with a short put? And he tried bowling with a short put and his shoulder got dislocated and
[Amit Varma]: he never played for India again. And you just had this lack of knowledge and you're trying these
[Amit Varma]: random jugaru things and all of that, which also seems to me to be really sad, because
[Amit Varma]: these are people with the talent, with the desire, but they don't have the information,
[Guest]: they don't have the ecosystem. And now there is information, because of the internet, you will
[Guest]: get information, you will be told, you know, this is what you try, this is what you don't try,
[Guest]: this is what you do, and it's told to you from experts. And the whole thing of language and not
[Guest]: speaking English, you know, it just goes out of the window. It's like they can work it out,
[Guest]: they just work it out. It's almost like that the desires and the ambitions of our athletes
[Guest]: is way ahead of what the ecosystem can provide them, you know, it's literally it's trying to
[Guest]: catch up with that. And there is a tussle and a friction and all the rest of it, but it's there,
[Amit Varma]: because the outside world has come here, you know. And in a sense, it seems to me that there are so
[Amit Varma]: many obstacles within the Indian system for any sport other than cricket, that just to get to the
[Amit Varma]: top, you're actually selecting for people with a higher level of cassettedness and mental strength
[Amit Varma]: and talent than anywhere else in the world. So you know, before we get to politics,
[Amit Varma]: so that brings me to this question about India as a sporting nation, like it is often said that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, you know, a place like, say, Australia has a sporting culture, people always going out
[Amit Varma]: and they're surfing, and they're doing this in their free time. And in our free time, I don't
[Amit Varma]: know what we do, we all doesn't matter. So the question then is that, and there are various
[Amit Varma]: theories for why we are not a sporting nation, there is a weather because tropical hot all the
[Unknown]: time, but that didn't stop other countries. There is a genes, but that also hasn't stopped other
[Unknown]: countries with similar. And we have a range of genes. We have a range of genes. And there is
[Amit Varma]: also the diet, which is, you know, sometimes brought forth, but, you know, even in terms of
[Amit Varma]: diet, I don't think that's any more kind of an excuse, by the way, just in just a kind of
[Amit Varma]: aside, a former chairman of the Indian selectors circa 2001, and you will surely know who I'm
[Amit Varma]: talking about, had once during a game in Mohali picked, I think, three fastballers for our team
[Amit Varma]: who happened to be Muslim. And the night before he was having a drink with us. And he and he went
[Amit Varma]: on and on about this whole racial theory of, you know, look at Pakistan, so many fastballers.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, for fastballers, we are going to look at Muslims from now on, that was,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, he was he was admittedly a little drunk at the time. And I won't take his name because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and yeah, yeah, you can't, it's hard to not know. But so what are your theories?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think none of these, like we both agree, are really completely legitimate reasons.
[Amit Varma]: So why is it that we are not a great sporting nation in sports other than the one which is
[Guest]: played seriously by seven or eight countries? My answer to this is very simple. It's taken me a
[Guest]: long time to arrive at it. But the answer is basically how our sports are administered and
[Guest]: the opportunity that we give our athletes. I think in the early years of Indian independence,
[Guest]: the government did a lot for sport. Had it not been for government intervention, and the army,
[Guest]: and banks, and you know, oil companies, and you have this inter-institutional tournament,
[Guest]: we would not be able to compete in a lot of the sports that we do. Now, in the era of
[Guest]: professionalism, instead of responding to the environment around them, and the fact that there
[Guest]: are so many opportunities, there's so much information available, there is so much money
[Guest]: in the Indian market, the administrators are still living in the 1970s, where they are my
[Guest]: baap. They want to be my baap. Like I said, that they want to be, you know, they are a bit worried
[Guest]: that there'll be a superstar that will be bigger than them. And you'll see this across the board
[Guest]: everywhere. You'll see this when there's political involvement in, they don't want to hand sport over
[Guest]: to professional management. They want to be in control of everything. And that is what has led
[Guest]: to the fact that we're here where we are. And the ultimate sort of reason, the ultimate validation
[Guest]: to what I'm saying, has come from the creation of these non-sporting non-profits. It is a jugar
[Guest]: that has come because the system was so rotten, that the administrators were so crap that athletes
[Guest]: who take six months to get their permission to go and get treated in a hospital for something before
[Guest]: the event is three days away. You know, so that kind of scenario is they have not caught up with
[Guest]: professionalism. And they don't want to catch up with professionalism. And that is why our sport is
[Guest]: where it is. It has nothing to do with talent. It has nothing to do with our lack of killer instinct,
[Guest]: our diet, our genes, nothing. And the football example is classic in the sense that we have,
[Guest]: I think Joy Bhattacharya also spoke to you about this, about the baby leagues. It has just begun.
[Guest]: I mean, I have gone and seen, not a lot, I'm like a complete interloper into Indian football.
[Guest]: But you can just see of the kind of talent that there is and the kind of numbers that there are.
[Guest]: Anywhere in India, you'll get numbers. Anywhere, you know, any sport, you'll have numbers turn up.
[Guest]: But you are not giving them enough events to compete in because it's too much work. COVID is
[Guest]: the perfect time for people to sit on their behinds and do nothing and say, Baba, we cannot
[Guest]: organize a tournament, there is COVID. You know, we can't create an infrastructure or a pathway or
[Guest]: anything because there is COVID. So that is primarily the reason. And look at what has
[Guest]: happened is that when you put an organization, how are you able to churn out players that are
[Guest]: in the top 50 in badminton, in men's, particularly in women's also to a certain level, because you
[Guest]: have this ecosystem that created it. And they were literally forced, the badminton people,
[Guest]: to have a lot more events. And because the sport came out in the front pages everywhere,
[Guest]: you have a world champion, you have a world number one, what is going on, you know?
[Guest]: So the biggest sort of fallback in this is the tennis people. Indian tennis has gone behind
[Guest]: rather than going ahead. Whereas in the 90s, you had competitive Davis Cup team.
[Guest]: Sania Mirza was your great women's player coming through. So my blame is strictly on administration.
[Guest]: And literally when I moved to Delhi is when this kind of just clicked in my mind. Oh, this is what
[Guest]: it is. This is this bloody gravy train you guys have been riding on. That's our taxpayers' money
[Guest]: that you've been using all this time and doing bugger all about it, you know? And as a young
[Guest]: journalist, you sort of, that's what administrators tell you all the time when you talk to them,
[Guest]: lack of killer is, they only want jobs. Hello, how are people to make a living? How are they
[Guest]: to feed their families? They only want jobs. They are so lazy. Yeah, they're lazy, they're greedy,
[Guest]: they're lazy, they're self-centered, but they can hit a penalty stroke like you can't, no?
[Guest]: So shut up and give them the chance and make them do it. But look at what you've done to hockey
[Guest]: also in India as well. Anyway, I could go on forever. Yeah, no, in fact, this is not just
[Amit Varma]: true of Indian sport. I think it's true of India in general that whatever people achieve is really,
[Amit Varma]: despite the state, like even badminton, it's these private individuals like Gopi Chand and all of
[Amit Varma]: that, making that kind of effort, which has built that ecosystem. And, you know, almost fortuitous
[Amit Varma]: that that one individual happened to be there at that time, just so driven at that time, and
[Amit Varma]: he kind of built everything. Another question, you know, whenever I sort of write about any Indian
[Amit Varma]: problem, outside of sport, like whether it's agriculture, or just take any problem, there's
[Amit Varma]: a deeper subset of the problem, which is the role of women in it, right? Everywhere, if there is an
[Amit Varma]: agriculture problem, there is a deeper subset with women farmers and farmers families and all that,
[Amit Varma]: and everywhere is a deeper subset, because one hardly needs to say the status of women in India
[Amit Varma]: is. So in a sporting context, what is it for the women like you have high profile things like all
[Amit Varma]: these wrestlers coming out of Haryana and even there, of course, the original instinct is a
[Amit Varma]: patriarchal one, because, you know, Chandgi Ram didn't have any sons. And, you know, in 1979,
[Amit Varma]: they open up the Olympics for women's wrestling, and he says, Okay, I'll train my daughter.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, Mahavir Phogat is one of his assistants. And the whole story kind of starts,
[Amit Varma]: which is why you have that bizarre site of the most, probably the most misogynist state in India,
[Amit Varma]: Haryana, with, you know, the lowest boys to girls ratio actually doing so well in a girl's sport.
[Amit Varma]: And today, of course, it's heartening to see that, you know, the women's cricket team,
[Amit Varma]: which is like so delightful to watch almost more than the men's team sometimes. So recently,
[Amit Varma]: I think both teams have been just killing it. No, no. And recently, I think both teams have
[Amit Varma]: been killing it. But it's just joyful to watch. What's the scene there? Like, because of barriers,
[Amit Varma]: there are so much more just at the basic level of girls going out to play the way you could. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: you are such an outlier that you ever even got to play with the boys, right? What have you seen there?
[Guest]: You're right with regards to women. But with regards to women's cricket, what I've been
[Guest]: saying a lot recently has been that when compared to any other sport, women's sport or a sport in
[Guest]: which women athletes are involved, cricket is the worst for when compared to women's hockey,
[Guest]: women's wrestling, women's boxing, women's badminton, because the Olympic charter demands
[Guest]: that men and women's sport is treated on par. So if men have to train, the women also have to
[Guest]: train. If men have to go out and compete at a qualifying tournament, the women also have that
[Guest]: qualifying tournament. So therefore, it has been made incumbent on Indian sports administrators
[Guest]: to do this in a way is that you have to show that presence that yeah, it's there, it's there,
[Guest]: we are here, our women's team is here, our women's women competitors are here. So you'll see the
[Guest]: wrestlers, the boxers, the shooters, everybody's there. Cricket is literally like women's cricket
[Guest]: is handled like in a medieval fashion, that we will give you some scraps, we will give you,
[Guest]: they don't have like, what I'm talking about opportunity is just look at women's cricket,
[Guest]: just look at the lack of women opportunity at every level, in a way for the best, the richest,
[Guest]: supposedly the best administered in open courts, sport in the country. Look at how they're looking
[Guest]: at their women's, they're treating their women's team. It is outrageous as to how they're getting
[Guest]: away with it. And it is despicable. I cannot even imagine that you will go a whole year without
[Guest]: playing, you will make them play three tapori type matches in Dubai for during the IPL and think
[Guest]: you're doing them a bloody favor. It is ridiculous what they're doing, you know. And so in comparison,
[Guest]: women, the Hockey Federation is looking good because our women's hockey players are
[Guest]: competing, they went to Germany, they went to Argentina, they've competed in this COVID time,
[Guest]: they're trying to, they've got, you know, they are looking forward to competing at the Olympics
[Guest]: as compared to last time. Women shooters are there, but where are the women cricketers?
[Guest]: They are only doing social media. What is this rubbish? You know, so you can see that if not
[Guest]: given, if not made mandatory, this is what happens to women's sport. If it's not made part of this
[Guest]: thing that you have to do, it's part of the, this is what happens. And if you look at how Indian
[Guest]: men's cricket is compared to all the other countries in terms of output, 2,000 matches a
[Guest]: year, all the other stuff that is going on and all that, and look at what's happening with the
[Guest]: women in cricket, you know. So you have to see that power responds to, if not required to do
[Guest]: the opposite of what they behave, if not required to behave in a fair manner,
[Guest]: they will behave with, in a patriarchal manner with the women that are there in their little,
[Guest]: in their ecosystem. They will respond to them in the way that, allow karenge, chance denge,
[Guest]: it's not like that, you know, you can't, you can't be like that. I mean, what is going to happen to
[Guest]: these girls that are there in the national team? We're not even talking about the first class
[Guest]: women, the players in the first class setup. We're not even there. We're just talking about
[Guest]: your most elite team as to how you're treating them. So it shows you that this kind of a mindset
[Guest]: and this kind of an attitude is, it's almost instinctive. It's almost, it just comes,
[Guest]: it's natural. If you didn't have to do it, this is what you'd behave like, this is what you'll do.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it always strikes me that it's a chicken and egg problem that is actually solvable. It's
[Amit Varma]: chicken and egg because you can easily say that the numbers aren't there, therefore the money
[Amit Varma]: won't be put into it, therefore there'll be no ecosystem, therefore the numbers won't be there
[Guest]: and it's circular. The numbers you're talking about, profitability numbers, you're talking
[Guest]: about revenue generation numbers or numbers of women to compete? No, I'm actually talking about
[Amit Varma]: demand for viewing the sport and the point is that only grows when you have more iterations
[Amit Varma]: of the sport actually on air. If your women's cricket team is playing all the time,
[Amit Varma]: then obviously the eyeballs will also explode, more and more people will discover how good
[Guest]: these players are. Had they not, sorry, I'll just jump in again, had they not reached the final
[Guest]: in 2017 and 2019, the BCCI would have been very happy. If they would have lost early,
[Guest]: the moment they reached the final, everyone switched their TV on. Semi-final, Harmanpreet
[Guest]: Kaur, you switched your TV on, you said what was that, you know, and that's what they don't want.
[Guest]: Literally, when you say they don't want to produce stars, now they don't want to produce women's
[Guest]: stars. It's there, you can see it happening in front of you, you know, you don't have to be
[Guest]: this thing to know that it's there. It's too much work. Why should we bother? All this money that
[Guest]: you're sitting on, we'll put it in fixed deposit, if we're getting 5%, so what? We'll take it,
[Guest]: 3% or whatever we're getting now. That's the mindset. So here's a thought leading to a question
[Amit Varma]: that sitting where the BCCI is, where they have both men's cricket and women's cricket and women's
[Amit Varma]: men's cricket is just making so much incredible money that, you know, you can see why their
[Amit Varma]: incentives are that you do your thousand matches a year or whatever it is for men's cricket and
[Amit Varma]: keep that going. Now, the structural issue there is that one easy solution would be that you just
[Amit Varma]: maybe hive it off and create a separate body for women's cricket. But the larger issue is two
[Amit Varma]: problems here. One is that earlier we were talking about how sort of the government federations will
[Amit Varma]: also spend a certain amount of time on the women's sport because it's mandated and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, we have seen that the sports that are run by government organizations are in a
[Amit Varma]: complete mess because incentives are all over the places, politics, bad administration.
[Guest]: It's the classic state dysfunction. No, the government doesn't run these sports.
[Guest]: Amit, the government doesn't run these sports. It's the federation that runs the sports and
[Guest]: they reach out to the governments to get money from them. So the sports ministry doesn't run
[Guest]: any sport. It's all these little federations where all these partitions are stuck into it
[Guest]: that runs it. So what the federations always do is that they blame the government for saying visa
[Guest]: nahi mila, paise nahi mila, permission nahi mila. But actually, it's the federations that are
[Guest]: sitting on their ass and doing nothing. You know, it's the federation that are causing this thing.
[Amit Varma]: Are these federations quasi-government organizations in the sense that they
[Guest]: get all their funding from the government? No, they get their funding, but they want
[Guest]: to be autonomous. It's the BCCI, the only reason they fight for their autonomy saying,
[Guest]: we don't take money from you. These federations say, we are independent of government interference.
[Guest]: And before they try and stop any kind of government questioning them, accountability,
[Guest]: therefore, they stop the sports bill. Therefore, they stop all these things. They are not obliged.
[Guest]: Only now they have begun submitting accounts to the government. They've only now begun doing it.
[Guest]: The government has just got some control on their functioning, though they're trying to
[Guest]: ease themselves off it because they don't want to be answerable. You know, they don't want to
[Guest]: have regular elections. They don't want to submit accounts. They don't want to have women in their
[Guest]: bodies. They don't want to have a player organization. So this is part of a sports
[Guest]: code that they have to answer to now, which BCCI is also blocking. So I'm saying it's like a cross
[Guest]: party gravy train, I call it. You know, it's like a cross all party buffet. Let's come and feed into
[Guest]: taxpayer money. It's a cross party buffet. Except BCCI is not eating into our money.
[Guest]: It's all hockey federation, gymnastics, all these people that are doing it, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a deeper structural problem, which I was coming to, which this feeds into,
[Amit Varma]: which is basically that one, these federations have a monopoly on the sport, and that makes it
[Amit Varma]: a monopsony for the players. A monopsony, by the way, for those who won't know is like the opposite
[Amit Varma]: of a monopoly where there's only one market for your services, which is essentially the case with
[Amit Varma]: all sports, right? If you play a sport, you have to play it within the umbrella of the BCCI,
[Amit Varma]: you can't go anywhere else. What happened with the IPL was that there was within this system,
[Amit Varma]: there was an artificial market, where you have multiple buyers for your talents. And
[Amit Varma]: in terms of incentives, it's a little better. But I think a problem that all countries have,
[Amit Varma]: and it's probably felt more acutely in India, because it's so dysfunctional,
[Amit Varma]: is that there is no competition. And when there is no competition, the incentives are sort of
[Amit Varma]: horrible. Like imagine if all writers had say a writers federation, you know, which had to go to
[Amit Varma]: the government for funds, and they would decide which writers to promote, which writers to train.
[Amit Varma]: Sharda, imagine what would happen to us. I don't think either of us would probably come up through
[Amit Varma]: the system to begin with. Dead, dead. No chance. I would be in library. Yeah. And we are only there
[Amit Varma]: because there's competition, you know, express didn't take you, midday did, you know, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth, down the line. And this kind of baffles me because I can't think of a way that
[Amit Varma]: this can ever kind of get sorted out. Cricket got lucky that at least in men's cricket, there has
[Amit Varma]: been a virtuous cycle. And, you know, all the money coming in has kind of helped. And now it's
[Amit Varma]: finally really helping the cricketers as well, to some extent, and we can quibble about aspects of
[Amit Varma]: it. But cricket's doing fine. But when you look at other sports in the country, what are your
[Amit Varma]: feelings? Are there positive signs of movement, which I presume would come from private initiatives,
[Amit Varma]: but are there positive signs of movements? What's the deal? I think that there are some federations
[Guest]: that are better than the others. You know, for example, shooting, they are able to do,
[Guest]: they have a generation of shooters that are now coaches. You know, so one of the very important
[Guest]: things that that sports need to do is also create opportunities for when you have finished playing,
[Guest]: what do you do after that, which, you know, so shooting has done it very well. We've seen that
[Guest]: now we've got some 10, 11 people going to the Olympics, we have a better chance of winning
[Guest]: medals. So there is some element of let's make our sport bigger, let's make our sport better.
[Guest]: And of course, the athletes and the administrators will fight, they've always fought, you know,
[Guest]: they've always had differences and problems. But you are increasing the width and the base of your
[Guest]: sport is increasing. And it's an expensive sport. So you're limiting it with the kind of people that
[Guest]: are coming into it. But say for example, when I think when Rathore won his silver medal,
[Guest]: after he won a silver medal at the Olympics, at that time, there's still about 300 people
[Guest]: competing at the nationals, it became 3000. After the gold medal, it multiplied further,
[Guest]: it's so big now that you're trying to get people to trim their competition,
[Guest]: the numbers in India just go wild. So like, for example, the shooting is one of those federations,
[Guest]: and it's there as an example, you see how it's working. Look, for example, the parallel to what
[Guest]: Joy was trying to do through volleyball, Joy Bhattacharya was trying to do through volleyball,
[Guest]: they fought with them, the federation didn't allow them to have it, there's a court case,
[Guest]: you know, so that volleyball league has stopped, because of the guys in the volleyball federation
[Guest]: who wanted to control everything, they don't want private enterprise, they don't want this.
[Guest]: So you've got these two ends. The only way that you will see progress, I mean, I would think that
[Guest]: at some point that athletes would just break out of this kind of, the really exceptional athletes
[Guest]: would break out. The one federation that is I think, most answerable, and should be most
[Guest]: answerable but it's not is athletics. We've had people in that in athletics federations for 20-30
[Guest]: years, why haven't we won more medals at an international level than we have? So you have
[Guest]: to see what are you doing that is wrong. If it was say a case study in business, it would just
[Guest]: stand out like a, you know, tree on fire in a public place. That's how evident it is. I think
[Guest]: in individual sports, you will get a better chance, in that sense of people breaking through and
[Guest]: doing better in boxing, maybe in wrestling, men's, women's, whatever it is, you'll get that, you'll
[Guest]: get those sort of breakthrough stars coming. But at the same time, it's like this girl who's a
[Guest]: fence qualified for the Olympics in fencing, which is a sport that we don't imagine Indians ever could
[Guest]: be competing in. It's because she's been supported from the outside by private funding and by being
[Guest]: able to go and train and working her way through and people working on her behalf to basically fight
[Guest]: the fights that she needs to fight. Similarly, with Bipa's story in gymnastics, there are younger
[Guest]: people in gymnastics coming through. So institutionally, it's a mess, but you would hope,
[Guest]: but like you're saying, it'll translate into everything in India is the same way, that you'll
[Guest]: get people, individuals coming through that will just pull you along in another direction.
[Guest]: So for example, golf, my views on golf are not to be uttered here in public. We have decent level
[Guest]: golfers at the Asian level competing in Europe. It's fine, it's doing okay, it's running on its
[Guest]: own, it has got these clubs and all the rest of it. But you know, because there is so much of
[Guest]: bad administration and institutionally bad administration, that you will always hold
[Guest]: yourself back. But you'll have people breaking through. I think that way, I mean, maybe it's a
[Guest]: cycle and a churn and we're seeing a change that's taken place. I mean, I remember from the
[Guest]: from the 90s to now, it's a massive change that has happened. And it's almost like athletes now
[Guest]: have got so much power that they are able to demand. Particularly the superstars at the top
[Guest]: level, they can be a bit precious and everything. But like I say, listen, they have the ability
[Guest]: which the administrators don't have, you just put up with it. So that's the way I do look at it.
[Guest]: In the sense of there not being a sporting culture is, I think we have to redefine the
[Guest]: fact that in our country, sporting culture is a livelihood issue. And our leisure is separate,
[Guest]: our issues of our leisure are not that important in the long way. You know, we'll always find a
[Guest]: way to be entertained and to enjoy ourselves and go to a club or go wherever else it is to play
[Guest]: whatever you have to play. You see all these little parks that come up, five-a-side football
[Guest]: that are there in the cities on the roofs of buildings, that's fine. But when it's a livelihood
[Guest]: issue, it's a way you have to look at differently in terms of creating more opportunities for those
[Guest]: athletes to have before them. I mean, Joy's Volleyball League is a prime example of what
[Amit Varma]: is wrong with the administration of Indian sport. Yeah, it's very sad. In fact, my episode with him
[Amit Varma]: was incredibly inspiring, because through the second half, when he spoke about football,
[Amit Varma]: especially, and all the work they're doing at the grassroots is just so inspirational. But
[Amit Varma]: yeah, my listeners won't forgive me if I don't ask you this one question, though,
[Guest]: what are your views on golf? Can't say. It's not fair. Because Joy Sakkarwati,
[Guest]: who's a very good friend, a journalist of mine, slightly younger than me, he has a very nice
[Guest]: Twitter handle called the Joy of Golf. I cannot be mean to him, so I will not say it.
[Amit Varma]: But you're not being mean to him, you're being mean to golf. Let's sort of leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: And let's in fact now, you know, because we are, you know, tripping on your story and away from
[Amit Varma]: your story and back to your story, let's kind of get back to your story. And, you know, so you are
[Amit Varma]: sort of a journalist and you've already spoken about how your craft evolved over a period of
[Amit Varma]: time and all of that. But what is it like being a woman in the sport? Because, you know, you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about how when you first went to a press box, you were the only woman there. You know,
[Amit Varma]: is that like all of us young people, you know, are faced of whatever gender are faced with the
[Amit Varma]: imposter syndrome when we first start covering where you start asking yourself questions like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, am I good enough? Can I manage this? You want to impress people that anxiety just kind
[Amit Varma]: of takes over you. And it just feels like you have another layer of that to deal with when you start.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that sort of process like? And obviously, it's, you know, people like you
[Amit Varma]: and Hemal Asher at Midday and all of that are kind of legendary for the kind of early work you did,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Prem keeps talking about how he didn't do sports writing in his early year,
[Amit Varma]: because you and Hemal were just so good, which is...
[Amit Varma]: Three girls, three girls in the department.
[Amit Varma]: Three girls, yeah, which is mind blowing. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, so what were those
[Amit Varma]: sort of early years like? And even beyond this issue, what was it like in terms of being able
[Amit Varma]: to do stories on cricket, like getting access to people, getting them to talk to you? I imagine
[Guest]: it must have been a whole different world. It was a very different world. And I think
[Guest]: what helped me, you do have a lot of anxiety when you're going through, you had to present
[Guest]: yourself as professionally as possible. Because you are female, you can't be seen as groupie,
[Guest]: fangirl, you have to try and like kind of literally almost do the opposite kind of a thing.
[Guest]: So you wanted to sort of melt into the furniture, which you can't really do. So there was that.
[Guest]: But at the same time, in the background, because I had institutional support in the organization,
[Guest]: it was a fantastic story, great story, they'll tell you very good. What is this nonsense? Your
[Guest]: spelling is wrong, the sentence... So you know, it was almost like you were being looked after
[Guest]: as a young professional coming into it. And your femaleness of it was only a big deal outside
[Guest]: that little world. And if you felt that confident, then you didn't really worry.
[Guest]: So for the first four and a half years, it was like just... And getting to know people. And
[Guest]: honestly, Amit, you know, the thing is that people were so good. People inside the Spots ecosystem
[Guest]: was so good. They were so decent, so helpful, welcoming, almost... You're just thinking about
[Guest]: it and when people tell you horror stories, you think I have no horror stories to tell you. I
[Guest]: genuinely don't. And I'm so blessed in that sense that it's like they took some time to get used to
[Guest]: you. But the point is, because you are working for a local paper, you're a Bombay person,
[Guest]: your bylines were coming the next day, your stories were coming. They said, okay, this is
[Guest]: one reporter only. What else? Only gender is different. And there is no toilet for her,
[Guest]: but it's okay, she'll manage. So you just had this amazing sense of sort of fitting in closely.
[Guest]: And so cricket was like the big gorilla. But in other sports, for example, hockey, tennis,
[Guest]: whatever, people were just fine. They were just happy sailing. They were just happy to chat with
[Guest]: you. They were just happy to tell you things. They were happy to share their experiences with you.
[Guest]: And it wasn't a problem. Because what they saw as a finished product at the end of it
[Guest]: was something they were like, okay, it's fine. It's written nicely. Nice piece, good photograph.
[Guest]: I'm happy. Savita Kiloskar, you should take pictures. Superb photograph. Very happy.
[Guest]: And that's how it worked. So I don't know what it was like in the bigger newspapers. For example,
[Guest]: Times had started having women reporters, Express had a few. I don't know what that was like. That
[Guest]: whole big mega, what's it called now, legacy media, big media. I have no idea what that atmosphere
[Guest]: was like, how the women reporters were treated there. Because I just was very lucky to start
[Guest]: out in midday, which was literally like being with people that were slightly... And K.N. Radhakrishnan,
[Guest]: who was the editor, was a really old, sweet gentleman who was there. Sound principles he
[Guest]: had. You could not pass... No bullshit would pass him. So he would say, no, no, you cannot write
[Guest]: this. This is not correct. And that was it. It was just that. And he was right. When you looked at
[Guest]: it at the end, you had overstated something or understated something or whatever. And he was
[Guest]: like the news editor in charge. A lovely, lovely gentleman and just a wonderful sort of senior
[Guest]: person to work with as well. Mostly they were youngish people. They would have been older than
[Guest]: you by say four, five years or something like that. Max in their thirties and everything.
[Guest]: And even the artists that you worked with, the layout artists were there. They were all young
[Guest]: people. And you had Tariq Ansari putting up with all your nonsense. So you just felt very secure.
[Guest]: And you felt looked after and protected by your organizations, even when you went on assignment,
[Guest]: which I think is something that I was very keen to do when I became a senior person.
[Guest]: Say I was in India today when there was someone going out in say Calcutta or Kerala or Bangalore
[Guest]: to do a story. I made sure that the reporter who was gone there did not get shat upon because you
[Guest]: could shit upon them kind of a thing. You had to look after that reporter. You had to say,
[Guest]: OK, listen, this is what you've got. Why don't we try and do it this way? Because of what I
[Guest]: learned at midday. That's the kind of organization it was. The Hindu was very different because it
[Guest]: was very, very like proper cut and dried. You just did your stuff and then you went ahead and you did
[Guest]: what you did. And but the Hindu gave you this rigor of being a cricket reporter in the old
[Guest]: fashioned sense that you turned up before the first ball of the match. And at the end of the
[Guest]: game, you tallied the scoreboard yourself before sending it to the office. You know,
[Guest]: and you filed your match report and you could not make mistakes. And that was it. So that was
[Guest]: another kind of drill. But then and you went to all these places. I remember I traveled to
[Guest]: Surat and Valsad with Hemant Kinkare. We went to cover some cricket. So you had colleagues that
[Guest]: were there. So you were generally looked after. You didn't feel it was like odd, you know,
[Guest]: like it was like strange. So by the time when I reached India today and I went in Delhi as well,
[Guest]: I was quite secure in that sense. You know, I had something to fall back on. And because in midday,
[Guest]: the culture of having women working around you was so normalized that you didn't think it was
[Guest]: a big deal that there were two more women reporters. So as far as I know, like the people
[Guest]: who went out from midday elsewhere, then really discover how shit the world could be in the big
[Guest]: paper that they really they came across insecure colleagues. And it was like hell when I heard
[Guest]: stories about that. And then I sort of dived back into cricket, which is a completely lovely
[Guest]: working environment as well. But the only strange thing used to be I went back to England from 2000.
[Guest]: I'd gone there. I was the only woman in the press box. I went to England in 2011. And again,
[Guest]: I was the only woman in the press box. And I said, this is absolute nonsense. How can this be?
[Guest]: And so at the same time, the numbers of women that are writing sport, talking about it,
[Guest]: podcasting or, you know, doing programs or videos or digital, copy desk, everything,
[Guest]: that number has really grown. I just did a rough audit of it a couple of years back.
[Guest]: And I sent a message out to a lot of the women that I know who are working. I said, listen,
[Guest]: tell me how many women do you know that are there? Give me the names, give me the emails.
[Guest]: I have a list of more than 60. Wow. I am so happy to hear that. More than 60 is a massive number
[Guest]: from nothing. And I think, and in India, you find this, you know, maybe all of them will have
[Guest]: terrible stories to tell you. A couple of them did write back and tell me that, you know, thanks for
[Guest]: asking. This is what it's been like. So I just had a general mass mail out, a nightmare type of a
[Guest]: mail out. And I said, I'm just trying to see how many of us are here. And we had about more than
[Guest]: 60. And I checked with somebody in SGFI, I said, how many are there? They said, oh, about 25.
[Guest]: 25. Many more. So that's the thing. And I think in other sports, it was normal for there to be
[Guest]: women in sports journalism, say, from the mid-90s, you know, in hockey, in tennis,
[Guest]: in badminton. It was normal for there to be women reporters. That became a normal thing.
[Guest]: And every paper began to have either one woman on the desk, at least, if not a person on the desk
[Guest]: and a reporter, you know, that kind of a thing. The websites made a difference as well. So it's
[Guest]: been, it's been quite a, I only remember in Sharjah, somebody asked me, Pakistani. It's just
[Guest]: a lame thing I did. He was the manager of the Pakistani team. I remember his name, but I'll not
[Guest]: say bechara for no reason. He said, why is it that India only has women sports reporters? And
[Guest]: I was stupidly, so I said, why is it that only Pakistanis ask? Which was just like such a cheap
[Amit Varma]: thing to say. Fantastic answer though. Yeah, but it was, I look at it now, it's just a sick thing
[Guest]: to respond to, you know. And there was this, because there were two of us who were there at
[Guest]: that time, there were two women, me and this other girl, I don't know whether she writes a Harley
[Guest]: in her name, I don't know whether she writes anymore. It is just so trite, yeah, it's such a
[Guest]: bad thing to say, I should have just ignored it. And I remember that thing now, I say, what is this
[Guest]: nonsense? And at that time, Farishteh was there. Farishteh Gati was at that time, I think she
[Guest]: wasn't at that tournament, but she was writing, you know, she was there, she was, her byline was
[Amit Varma]: known. Meaningless, anyway. That's a lovely answer. And you, this conversation is making
[Amit Varma]: me very nostalgic as well, because Savita Kirloskar, Hemant Kinkre, they've both been
[Unknown]: colleagues of mine in different places. So it's like, you know, it's like, starting with Max Biagi,
[Amit Varma]: there's a whole thread of kind of connections between your past and my past. So let's, at one
[Amit Varma]: point, you mentioned Mr. Radhakrishnan in midday talk, you know, talking about that this is too
[Amit Varma]: overstated, this is too understated. Let's talk about overstated and understated because it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that sports writers have to face these almost conflicting imperatives. And one imperative
[Amit Varma]: is that you capture the essential drama of whatever game you're watching, you capture
[Amit Varma]: the drama and make it alive. And that's great sports writing. But the other imperative sometimes
[Amit Varma]: might be that you're watching a really boring game that is completely dull. But because you
[Amit Varma]: as a writer want something great to come out of that, you kind of, you kind of create the drama,
[Amit Varma]: hype it up. Like, you know, when I think of Wally Hammond's famous phrase about Amar Singh
[Amit Varma]: bowling of the cracks of doom, you know, and I can't figure out ki, matlab ki, it clever hai,
[Amit Varma]: but I can't figure out whether it's good or bad, because on the one hand, fine, it's vivid,
[Guest]: you know, you remember it. It's fantastic. Yeah, exactly. It's like Wally Hammond told you and me,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he came off the wicket like the crack of doom and you're thinking, wow.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's, but on the other hand, did he really? So, you know, this is...
[Guest]: Why let facts in the way of a good story, you know, our legendary phrase. Yeah, yeah. See,
[Guest]: but the great thing is that Wally Hammond didn't have to prove it to us with, because there was no
[Amit Varma]: television, he could tell us what it was, what he saw. Maybe he could say anything.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, even with a lot of sort of carduses writing, I get this feeling that
[Amit Varma]: it's not, not really like that. But is this something that you then have to,
[Amit Varma]: that as a sports writer, you start becoming aware of your own tendencies of maybe,
[Amit Varma]: like, in my case, I certainly feel that there were times when I went too far. And sometimes
[Amit Varma]: you just need to take yourself out of the equation and kind of get really blank and try to notice
[Amit Varma]: things for what they are. And, you know, I love your writing, because you sort of capture both,
[Amit Varma]: like there are moments in your writing, especially your feature stories that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that have that sort of emotional poetic feel to it almost like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like your former colleague Rohit Brijnath at his best, for example. But there's a lot of your other
[Amit Varma]: writing, which is very muscular, narrative driven, you're really going forward, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so you're one of those very rare writers who does both of those very well, you know, touches
[Amit Varma]: the sublime and at the same time, you can really get deep into the action and the kind of nuances.
[Amit Varma]: So, like, forgive me if I'm if sound like I'm overthinking it, but you know, in my own writing,
[Amit Varma]: I sometimes try to think about my own tendencies. And what am I doing here? And all of that,
[Amit Varma]: is this stuff that you think about? Is this something that you have to warn yourself against?
[Guest]: Thanks for all the fantastic things you said, first of all, but what you're saying is right.
[Guest]: I think it depends on what the situation demands. I think almost that that's how I respond to what
[Guest]: I have to write. Now, if I'm writing a piece that is completely a spontaneous response to
[Guest]: what has happened, then I feel you have to just let go and go for it, you know, because you should
[Guest]: be able to create in your piece, that response of emotion, or whatever the visual sight that you saw
[Guest]: that you couldn't forget, you should be able to create it so that when you read it 10 years ago,
[Guest]: you remember what it felt like, you know, the I feel that is really important, because that to my
[Guest]: mind, is the fundamental essence of descriptive sports writing, for example. So, but you learn
[Guest]: that in a way, it's almost like there's a discipline that you do it, you know, it's almost
[Guest]: that you sit down, and you say, Okay, this is what I have to do, and you're going for it. And
[Guest]: when you're responding to it, I don't know whether you do that as well, I'm a compulsive note taker.
[Guest]: So if I know I have to write something, I will take notes and take notes and take I may not use
[Guest]: any of it, but I will take notes, because that's my way of having a stick in my mind. When you're
[Guest]: writing something else, when you're writing something that is, I mean, it may almost look
[Guest]: cynical, in a way that you're saying it, but I think you have to be very clear about what that
[Guest]: piece has to be, what you're going to say in it, how you're going to, you know, what is not how
[Guest]: you're trying to tickle the public's emotions or what in a sense of what you're trying to replicate.
[Guest]: So where I want that piece to reflect that moment in time when I'm writing about something with an
[Guest]: emotion. So when you're writing about, you know, I wrote a piece in, which was my colleague Joy's
[Guest]: idea at ESPN, about the three women athletes in Rio, Deepa, Sindhu and Sakshi. So you're trying
[Guest]: to write what that felt like, so that when you read it 10 years later, you still remember what
[Guest]: it felt like, because it was fabulous at that time, whatever happened to them, whatever their
[Guest]: careers turned out, however things went, in that moment, it was a special thing for everybody.
[Guest]: All of us was in it, you know, at the time. So like what happened, you know, when Tendulkar
[Guest]: retired, I had so many people, I keep coming back to Tendulkar, this is nonsense.
[Guest]: And I wouldn't even call myself a Tendulkar fan fan, but who knows. So when he retired,
[Guest]: I had people sending me messages saying, I'm crying. I don't even like cricket because they
[Guest]: all saw his speech. I didn't write anything, but so it's that kind of a thing that you remember
[Guest]: that time. So that's what I try to do when I'm writing something on the top of my head.
[Guest]: It's actually not at the top of your head. It's done in a very, very careful manner
[Guest]: that you have to literally put it down there. If it means emptying yourself of that emotion,
[Guest]: almost by putting it out on the paper, then that's what you do. Because then when you go
[Guest]: back to it and you look at it and say, okay, now I remember what that felt like, you know,
[Guest]: that is what I try to do. And in the other kind of writing that you're doing, if you're trying
[Guest]: to analyze or you're trying to like the Bumrah piece, for example, you have to just break it
[Guest]: down into its smallest possible element and explain it to people and say, look, I need to
[Guest]: share this with you that what I have found out, I need to tell you to understand how good he is
[Guest]: because of this, you know, that's the two sort of levels at which you work. I mean, I recently
[Guest]: wrote a piece on Rashid Khan for Al Jazeera online, and I forgot that the audience that is going to
[Guest]: read that piece doesn't have to be an entire cricket audience at all. So I'm writing about
[Guest]: grips and I'm writing about types of googly's and this and that and the other, and it just got
[Guest]: edited out because hello, people are reading this in parts of the world where they don't play
[Guest]: cricket. They only tell us the story of Rashid Khan, what he was like before he became a superstar.
[Guest]: So I mean, those details were there. I spoke to a couple of people and everything.
[Guest]: So you can sometimes over, but you need to know who you're writing for in that sense,
[Guest]: how much you have to explain, how much you don't have to explain. So it's that kind of thing that
[Guest]: that I'm very careful of what that piece is to be. I mean, and it's just training with which you do
[Guest]: it. You know, you can't write an emotional piece when you're trying to explain something in a very
[Guest]: clear way about what someone's this is like, maybe a couple of sentences here or there,
[Guest]: but you have to basically then explain something. But if you if you're going for emotion, then go
[Guest]: for full emotion. As they say, like Prajwal's Billie Jean King thing, when you have to go for
[Guest]: the back of the court, you know, go for the line, don't go for the bottom of the net, go for the
[Guest]: back of the court. If you have to hit it out, hit it out, but other side, not not don't play,
[Guest]: don't choke, don't control your shot, just go for it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember some writing advice given to me by Tim Delisle, who was my boss,
[Amit Varma]: Sambit's boss at Wisden when I had first joined in 2001. And what he said was, quote,
[Amit Varma]: when in doubt, play your shots, stop quote, which is something I do tell my writing students. And
[Amit Varma]: he's written a great book called The Cornell Guide to How to Write Well. So if you're interested in
[Amit Varma]: writing and you know, you're listening to this, just do buy that up. It's on Kindle Unlimited.
[Amit Varma]: So is it fair to say, like from what you're saying, is it then fair to say that there is
[Amit Varma]: a certain strand of your work, not all of it, but a certain strand of your body of work,
[Amit Varma]: which is like a chronicle of your emotional journey as a sports lover?
[Guest]: Absolutely, absolutely. I would say that that is, you know, so I remember in the Athens Olympics,
[Guest]: Leander and Mahesh lost that match in which they could have won a medal. It felt like death.
[Guest]: And now when I think about it, I'm thinking, okay, they lost, but that time it felt like death. So
[Guest]: you have to just put it all out. And then that's, it's almost like a therapy that you just get it
[Guest]: out of the way, you know, that it's just out of there. So it would be, it would be that. That's
[Guest]: a good, that's a good sort of assessment of what you're seeing. But the other thing I remember
[Guest]: very clearly is what Shashi Deshpande said once, and it stayed in my head. She said,
[Guest]: there is, there are two types of writing, the kind that says, listen to me and the kind that
[Guest]: says, look at me. She said, but always be the, I would prefer to be the kind that says, listen to
[Guest]: me, listen to what I'm saying, listen to what I have to share, rather than look at how stylish
[Guest]: and how good I am and whatever, whatever. That's to my mind, that is the thing. And the point is
[Guest]: that she pointed it out so clearly, which tells you that you have to be, because it's very easy
[Guest]: to kind of, you know, embroider, but it's not easy to, uh, emote is a horrible word,
[Amit Varma]: but you know what I mean? Yeah. No, this is a beautiful quote. It's, it's straight away
[Guest]: going on a slide for my writing course. Uh, listen to me versus look at me. I'll find the
[Guest]: quote and send it to you. I'll find the quote and send it. I have it. I have it somewhere safe.
[Amit Varma]: And is it the case that then, you know, given how sport is so much a part of our modern mythology,
[Amit Varma]: the stories we tell ourselves about who we are and so on, that the story of sport is not really
[Amit Varma]: a story of events on sporting fields with people competing against each other, but it's a story of
[Amit Varma]: an emotional arc of a nation almost as you know, uh, we, we go through different points. And when
[Amit Varma]: you look back on your old writing, do you sort of, um, you know, like if you look at something
[Guest]: you wrote 20 years ago or 15 years ago, which you can, because you just try not to look at them.
[Guest]: I try not, they're just there, but I just try not to look at them. I seriously try not.
[Amit Varma]: But does it become a reintroduction to a person you were and you no longer are?
[Guest]: Um, perhaps. I remember watching Graham Pollock play and I just, I just fell in love with his
[Guest]: covered right. He was like, he was in his sixties. I just fell in love with it. And I remember
[Guest]: writing the sports stuff, which of course they cut at something about, I can't remember. It's
[Guest]: just this nonsense. I wrote something about it, God or something like that. They just cut it,
[Guest]: you know, because I literally, it was like one sublime thing that I watched, you know, that way.
[Guest]: So I don't know whether it's a person I'm not, it's not like that. I think I'm the same,
[Guest]: maybe I'm just, uh, more, uh, maybe you, yeah, you can't be the person you were,
[Guest]: you were in your twenties. You'd be completely naive and uninformed about anything. You have
[Guest]: to be a little bit more pragmatic and proper and, and, and realistic, uh, in this day and age.
[Guest]: Uh, so yeah, yeah. Perhaps when you look back and you see that, you'd say, Oh boss,
[Guest]: bahut overstate hogaya, bahut zyada, you know. Okay. So I've, I've kind of taken a lot of your
[Amit Varma]: time and honestly, listen, really, I could speak to you for four hours more, so we must do it
[Amit Varma]: again sometime. But I'll talk to you about poker Amit.
[Amit Varma]: I'm happy to talk about poker anytime. There's not much to say. It's not, it's not really even,
[Amit Varma]: uh, it's, it's very interesting because it's not just a sport. It's on the intersection of
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of other things. Not all of them are, uh, so, uh, kind of, uh, attractive, but no,
[Amit Varma]: but there are, there's tons of stuff I wanted to talk to you more about, but we should leave that
[Amit Varma]: for later. But I'll end with this, you know, that you've kind of almost co-written or put together
[Amit Varma]: a couple of books, you know, John writes Indian summers and the Yuvraj Singh thing and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember when I was in wisdom and then quick info in the early two thousands, and I
[Amit Varma]: would tell all my young colleagues that what are you doing? Our counterparts in England,
[Amit Varma]: they are writing one book every three years. It was almost like a rite of passage that, uh,
[Amit Varma]: that you write a lot of books. And I think that's a great thing because it forces you to look,
[Amit Varma]: look in a different way. You're attempting a new form, uh, and you kind of grow by doing
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And, um, and it seems to me that with a lot of sports writer, a lot of the writing,
[Amit Varma]: it feels that it just, it's in a lot of dispersed locations and it feels transient for that reason.
[Amit Varma]: It kind of just disappears. In fact, so one of the things that I would ask you to do, which I
[Amit Varma]: think many listeners will agree with me is that we start a newsletter of your own, which we can
[Amit Varma]: get in our inboxes where you publish regularly. So there's like one place for it to create a
[Amit Varma]: website shardhaugra.in or something. But quite apart from that, what are, you know, when you,
[Amit Varma]: when you look ahead, you know, you've had a remarkably rich journey and I suppose most of
[Amit Varma]: it isn't planned. You know, life is what happens to you when you're busy making other plans. You
[Amit Varma]: just kind of follow the flow, but looking ahead, what are some of the things that you'd like to do
[Amit Varma]: or go deeper into? Because I know it won't just be more of the same. There are so many subjects in
[Amit Varma]: which your knowledge is so deep, your passion is so deep, more importantly. So, you know, can we
[Amit Varma]: have the audacity to expect some books to come with your name on it? How do you look ahead?
[Guest]: I would be humbly, graciously, I would be, first of all, it was great chatting, Amit,
[Guest]: you know, almost, I feel like, I feel like sort of narcissistically, I've like said whatever I
[Guest]: had to say. But yeah, I mean, I would, I would like to write a book. There are a couple of ideas
[Guest]: that I have. One that I'm particularly passionate about is about women in Indian sport. I would like
[Guest]: to write about that in a way that is not, it's not Indian sportsmen. What happens to women when
[Guest]: they come into Indian sport? That's my sort of topic of interest. And I want to see how that
[Guest]: goes. I want to see whether it's sort of viable to do it, because we would want to spend a lot
[Guest]: of time focused on how you're, on what you're, you want to do it fully rather than sort of
[Guest]: try and cover your rent and so on. But, but so it's, but I would definitely, I would definitely
[Guest]: think that now because I'm not employed anymore, I describe myself in two terms. I say, I mean,
[Guest]: I'm, I oscillate between Azad Parinda and Pagal Kutta. So free bird and wild dog, you know,
[Guest]: so I'm kind of going from here to there. So that's my, that's my range, as you say. So yeah,
[Guest]: but definitely a book about that. I think primarily that is of my interest. This thing
[Guest]: about women and sport, I'm getting more interested in the subject and I think it should be written
[Guest]: about more carefully and with a little bit more depth and nuance and understanding that,
[Guest]: that is there. Because of the fact that the last 20 years, for example, have been
[Guest]: almost a complete sea change for what happened. I mean, I have these stats at hand. I remember
[Guest]: reading through them. I don't know if they're here. Let me see. Suddenly, literally in the 2000s,
[Guest]: the numbers of women competing at the Olympics almost doubled and trebled, you know, in the
[Guest]: 20s. It just, the numbers have just gone up wildly. And so these last 20 years are important
[Guest]: to look at and to see what it was like, what are the conditions that they are, because everyone
[Guest]: sort of hung up on this Nari Shakti and, you know, the hero myth, the arc of the great story and
[Guest]: everything. I want to just look at it in a different way to see all the sort of possibilities
[Guest]: and the problems and the various sort of shades that are there in the life of women who are
[Guest]: involved in Indian sport as competitors and as coaches and so on. Well, more power to you,
[Amit Varma]: and Godspeed. Can't wait for that book to come out. I must, by the way, point out here that
[Amit Varma]: just as you were kind of cruel to Sayan and to Atul Bedede and so on, you have done the same
[Amit Varma]: thing for dogs, where you have said, I don't know whether I'm Azad Parinda or Pagal Kutte.
[Amit Varma]: What is wrong with Kutte? Earlier, and I have noticed this, see my power of observation.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier, you used the phrase thrown to the dogs. I know, I know. Very bad. Too lots of dogs. I've
[Amit Varma]: done this to very bad. Twice you've done this to dogs. Deep psychoanalysis in no time at all. You
[Guest]: have discovered all my biases and everything. Sayan, Atul Bedede and dogs. No, but this is my
[Guest]: range. I'm happy to be Pagal Kutte. I'm very happy to be Pagal Kutte and Azad Parinda. That is the
[Guest]: full range. Well, may both the Azad Parinda and the Pagal Kutte and you flourish. Thanks so much
[Guest]: for coming on the show. I've had such a great time talking to you. Thank you, Amit. It's been
[Guest]: great. It's been great fun. I don't know what it ends up sounding like, but I've had a great time.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Amit Bhandari
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai